Sales Tax commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both. Confidentiality of information 7. (1) Every person, having any official duty or being appointed or employed under this Act, shall regard and deal with all documents, information, returns or declarations relating to the business, sale value of the goods of any taxable person or the sale value of imported goods as confidential. (2) Subject to subsection (4), every person having possession or control over any document, information, return or declaration or copies thereof in relation to the business or the sale value of the goods of any taxable person or the sale value of imported goods, who at any time, otherwise than for the purposes of this Act or with the express authority of the Director General— (a) communicates or attempts to communicate the information or anything contained in the document, return or declaration or copies thereof to any person; or (b) suffers or permits any person to have access to any information or to anything contained in the document, return or declaration or copies thereof, commits an offence. (3) No person having any official duty or being appointed or employed under this Act or who is referred to in subsection (4) shall be required to produce in any matters or proceedings in any court or tribunal any document, information, return or declaration or to divulge or communicate in the matters or proceedings any matter or thing, coming under his notice in the performance of his duties under this Act, except as may be necessary for the purposes of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act or in order to institute a prosecution or in the course of a prosecution for any offence committed under this Act. (4) The Director General may, as he deems fit, transmit or communicate any document, information, return or declaration referred to in subsection (1) or anything contained therein, to the 15 16 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 Chief Statistician of the Department of Statistics Malaysia which may be required in the performance of his official duty. (5) Notwithstanding subsection (4), the Minister may, as he deems fit, allow the Director General to transmit or communicate any document, information, return or declaration referred to in subsection (1) or anything contained therein to any other person. PART III IMPOSITION AND SCOPE OF SALES TAX Imposition and scope of sales tax 8. (1) A tax to be known as sales tax shall be charged and levied on all taxable goods— (a) manufactured in Malaysia by a registered manufacturer and sold, used or disposed of by him; or (b) imported into Malaysia by any person. (2) Sales tax on any importation of taxable goods into Malaysia shall be levied and payable as if it were a customs duty or an excise duty and as if the imported taxable goods are dutiable and liable to customs duty or excise duty. (3) This Act shall be construed as one with the Customs Act 1967 and the Excise Act 1976 [Act 176] with regards to the importation or exportation of goods including goods in transit and the movement of goods under customs control or excise control. (4) Where there is any inconsistency between the provisions of the Customs Act 1967 or the Excise Act 1976 and the provisions of this Act, the provisions of this Act shall prevail. Determination of sale value of taxable goods 9. (1) In the case of taxable goods— (a) sold by a taxable person; or Sales Tax (b) manufactured by a taxable person and— (i) used by him otherwise than as materials in the manufacture of the taxable goods; or (ii) disposed of by him otherwise than by sale, the sale value of such taxable goods shall be determined in accordance with the regulations made under this Act. (2) In the case of taxable goods imported into Malaysia, the sale value of the taxable goods shall be the sum of the following amounts: (a) the value of such taxable goods for the purpose of customs duty as determined in accordance with the Customs Act 1967; (b) the amount of customs duty, if any, paid or to be paid on such taxable goods; and (c) the amount of excise duty, if any, paid or to be paid on such taxable goods. (3) Where any registered manufacturer receives taxable goods from any person to be manufactured and subsequently returns the goods so manufactured to such person, the sale value of the goods so manufactured shall, subject to approval of the Director General, be the amount that the manufacturer charges for work performed by him Rate of sales tax 10. (1) Sales tax shall be charged and levied at the rate fixed in accordance with subsection (2) on the taxable goods sold, used or disposed of or imported, by reference to the sale value of the taxable goods as determined under section 9. (2) The Minister may, by order published in the Gazette— (a) fix the rate of sales tax to be charged and levied under this Act; and 17 18 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (b) vary or amend the rate of sales tax fixed under paragraph (a). (3) Any order made under subsection (2) shall— (a) be laid before the Dewan Rakyat at the next meeting of the Dewan Rakyat; and (b) at the expiration of one hundred and twenty days from being laid under paragraph (a) or of such extended period as the Dewan Rakyat may, by resolution, direct, cease to have effect in whole if the order is not confirmed, or in part in so far as the order is not confirmed, by a resolution passed by the Dewan Rakyat within the said one hundred and twenty days or, if such period has been extended, within such extended period. (4) Where an order ceases to have effect in whole or in part as provided under subsection (3), any sales tax charged and levied in pursuance of such order or such part of the order as ceases to have effect shall, subject to subsections (5) and (6), be refundable to the person by whom such sales tax was paid. (5) Unless the Minister otherwise directs, no sales tax refundable under subsection (4) shall be refunded, unless the person by whom the sales tax was paid makes a claim in writing to the Director General within one year from the date on which the order ceases to have effect in whole or in part, and the claim shall contain such particulars as the Director General may require. (6) The Director General may reduce or disallow any sales tax refundable under subsection (4) to the extent that the refund would unjustly enrich the person by whom the sales tax was paid. Sales tax due 11. (1) The sales tax chargeable under paragraph 8(1)(a) shall be due at the time the taxable goods are sold, disposed of otherwise than by sale, or first used otherwise than as materials in the manufacture of taxable goods, by the taxable person Sales Tax (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1)— (a) the Minister may determine different time for sales tax to be due in respect of petroleum subject to such conditions as the Minister deems fit; and (b) where any sale of taxable goods is made by any person, who is a taxable person under this Act, within the period beginning from 1 June 2018 and ending immediately before the effective date, and the taxable goods are delivered on or after the effective date— (i) the sale of such taxable goods shall be deemed to have been made on the date such taxable goods are delivered notwithstanding any payment, wholly or partly, is received or invoice is issued, for such taxable goods during such period; (ii) any payment received within such period or on or after the effective date, or invoice issued within such period, shall be deemed to have been received or issued on the date such taxable goods are delivered; and (iii) sales tax shall be charged and levied on such taxable goods and shall become due on the date such taxable goods are delivered. (3) Where the taxable goods referred to in subparagraph (2)(b) are petroleum, the sales tax in respect of such petroleum shall be due at the time as determined under subparagraph (2)(a). (4) Where any registered manufacturer who ceases to carry on business as a manufacturer is succeeded in such business by another person who— (a) purchases from the registered manufacturer any stock of taxable goods which is on hand at the date of cessation; or (b) acquires any stock of taxable goods as a trustee, receiver, liquidator, donee, or beneficiary of such registered manufacturer, no sales tax shall be due on such purchase or acquisition. 19 20 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 PART IV REGISTRATION Liability to be registered 12. (1) The Minister may, by order published in the Gazette, determine the total sale value of taxable goods for the purpose of registration of any manufacturer under this Part. (2) Subject to subsection (3), any manufacturer of taxable goods is liable to be registered at the following time, whichever is the earlier: (a) at the end of any month, where the total sale value of all his taxable goods in that month and the eleven months immediately preceding that month has exceeded the total sale value of taxable goods determined under subsection (1); or (b) at the end of any month, where there are reasonable grounds for believing that the total sale value of all his taxable goods in that month and the eleven months immediately succeeding that month will exceed the total sale value of taxable goods determined under subsection (1). (3) The total sale value of all taxable goods of a manufacturer in the month and the eleven months immediately preceding that month referred to in paragraph (2)(a) shall be disregarded if— (a) the registration of the manufacturer is cancelled, otherwise than under subsection 19(3), during that period; and (b) the Director General is satisfied that before the manufacturer’s registration is cancelled, he has given all information required by the Director General in order to determine whether to cancel the registration or not. (4) Where any person succeeds any business from a registered manufacturer as specified in subsection 11(4), such person shall be deemed to be a manufacturer who is liable to be registered on the date he succeeded the business Sales Tax Application for registration 13. (1) Any manufacturer who is liable to be registered under section 12 shall apply to the Director General for registration as a registered manufacturer in the prescribed form not later than the last day of the month following the month in which he is liable to be registered as referred to in paragraph 12(2)(a) or (b). (2) Upon receipt of the application under subsection (1), the Director General may approve the registration, subject to such conditions as he deems fit. (3) The Director General shall register the manufacturer under subsection (1) with effect from the first day of the month following the month in which the application under subsection (1) is made or from such earlier date as may be agreed between the Director General and the manufacturer but such date shall not be earlier than the date he becomes liable to be registered. (4) Where any manufacturer fails to comply with subsection (1), the Director General shall register the manufacturer on the date as the Director General may determine but not earlier than the date he is liable to be registered under section 12. (5) Any manufacturer who fails to comply with subsection (1) commits an offence. Voluntary registration 14. (1) Any manufacturer who is not liable to be registered under section 12 may apply to the Director General for registration as a registered manufacturer. (2) Upon receipt of the application under subsection (1), the Director General may approve the registration from such date as he may determine subject to such conditions as he deems fit. Direction to treat persons as single taxable person 15. (1) Notwithstanding section 12, where the Director General is satisfied that any separation of business activities is artificial, he may make a direction requiring that— (a) the persons named in that direction be treated as a single taxable person carrying on business activities described 21 22 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 in that direction with effect from the date as specified in the direction; and (b) the single taxable person referred to in paragraph (a) to be registered with effect from the date as specified in the direction. (2) For the purposes of subsection (1), in determining whether any separation of business activities is artificial, regard shall be had to the extent to which the different persons carrying on those business activities are closely bound to one another by financial, economic and organizational links. (3) The Director General may make a direction under subsection (1) naming any person if the Director General is satisfied that— (a) the person is manufacturing or has manufactured taxable goods; (b) the activities in the course of which the person manufactures or has manufactured those taxable goods form only part of certain activities in the business and that the other activities in that business, whether or not that other activities are similar to the activities carried on by that person, are being carried on concurrently or previously, or both, by one or more other persons; and (c) if all taxable goods manufactured in that business were taken into account, the person carrying on that business would, at the time of such direction is made, be required to be registered by virtue of section 12. (4) Any direction made under subsection (1) shall be served on each of the persons named in it. (5) Where, after a direction had been made under subsection (1), it appears to the Director General that any person who has not been named in that direction is manufacturing taxable goods in the course of activities which should be regarded as part of the business activities, the Director General may make and serve on that person a supplementary direction adding that person’s name to those of the persons named in the direction under subsection (1). Sales Tax 23 (6) Upon the addition of the person’s name in the direction under subsection (5), that person shall be treated as a single taxable person carrying on the business activities described in the direction under subsection (1) with effect from the date as specified in the direction. (7) Where, immediately before any direction including a supplementary direction is made, any person named in the direction has been registered in respect of taxable goods manufactured by him as specified in subsection (3) or (5), his registration shall be revoked by the Director General with effect from the date the single taxable person is registered under subsection (1). (8) Upon the revocation of registration under subsection (7), the person whose registration has been revoked together with all other persons named in the direction under subsection (1) shall be treated as a single taxable person. (9) In relation to a business specified in a direction, the persons named in such direction together with any person named in a supplementary direction relating to that business, being the persons who together are to be treated as a single taxable person, are referred to as the “constituent members” in subsections (10) and (11). (10) Where any direction is made under subsection (1)— (a) the single taxable person carrying on the business specified in the direction shall be registered in such name as the persons named in the direction may jointly nominate by notice in writing given to the Director General not later than fourteen days after the date the direction is served on the last of such persons named in the direction or, in default of such nomination, in such name as may be specified in the direction; (b) any taxable goods manufactured by one of the constituent members in the course of the activities of the single taxable person shall be treated as being taxable goods manufactured by the single taxable person each of the constituent members shall be jointly and severally liable for any sales tax due and payable by the single taxable person; 24 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (d) without prejudice to paragraph (c), any failure by the single taxable person to comply with any requirement imposed under this Act shall be treated as a failure by each of the constituent members severally; and (e) subject to paragraphs (a) to (d), the constituent members shall be treated as a partnership carrying on the business of the single taxable person and any question as to the scope of the activities of that business at any time shall be determined accordingly. (11) Where it appears to the Director General that any person who is one of the constituent members should no longer be regarded as such for the purposes of paragraphs (10)(c) and (d) and the Director General gives notice in writing to that effect, that person— (a) shall not have any liability by virtue of paragraphs (10)(c) and (d) for anything done after the date specified in that notice; and (b) on the date as specified in that notice, shall be treated as having ceased to be a member of the partnership referred to in paragraph (10)(e). Registration of partnership 16. (1) The registration of— (a) persons carrying on a business in a partnership as a registered manufacturer shall be in the name of the firm; and (b) the same persons carrying on separate businesses in a partnership as a registered manufacturer shall be in the separate names of the respective firms. (2) In determining whether taxable goods are manufactured by the persons referred to in subsection (1), no account shall be taken of any change in the partnership. Sales Tax (3) Any person who ceases to be a partner in a partnership shall— (a) notify the Director General in writing of the date of cessation within thirty days from the date of cessation; and (b) pay for the proportion of the partnership’s liability on any sales tax due and payable on any taxable goods manufactured by the partnership until the date of cessation. (4) Where any person ceases to be a partner in a partnership under subsection (3) during any taxable period, any notice, whether of assessment or otherwise, which is served on the partnership and relates to the taxable period or to any other taxable period during the whole or part of which he was a partner in the partnership, shall be deemed as to have been served also on him. (5) Notwithstanding any written law to the contrary, any notice, whether of assessment or otherwise, which is addressed to a partnership by the name in which it is registered under this Act, and is served in accordance with this Act shall be deemed— (a) as having been properly served on the partnership; and (b) where subsection (4) applies, as having been properly served on any previous partner. (6) Subsections (1) and (3) shall not affect the extent to which a partner is liable for sales tax owed by the firm under any other written law. (7) Where a person is a partner in a firm during part only of a taxable period, his liability for sales tax on the sale of taxable goods by the firm during the taxable period shall be the proportion of the firm’s liability as may be just. (8) Where any notice is required to be given by a partnership under this Act, it shall be the joint and several liability of all partners to give the notice, except that if a notice is given by any of the partners, it shall be regarded as sufficient compliance with the requirement. 25 26 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (9) Any person who contravenes paragraph (3)(a) or (b) commits an offence. (10) For the purposes of this section, a partnership excludes a limited liability partnership. Cessation of liability to be registered 17. (1) Subject to subsection (2), any registered manufacturer shall cease to be liable to be registered at the end of any month where the Director General is satisfied that the total sale value of all his taxable goods in that month and the eleven months immediately succeeding that month (“hereinafter referred to as “the period of twelve months”) does not exceed the total sale value of taxable goods determined under subsection 12(1). (2) A registered manufacturer shall not cease to be liable to be registered by virtue of subsection (1) where the Director General is satisfied that the reason the total sale value of all his taxable goods does not exceed the total sale value of taxable goods determined under subsection 12(1) is that in the period of twelve months referred to in subsection (1) he temporarily ceases manufacturing such taxable goods, or suspends manufacturing such taxable goods for a period of thirty days or more. Notification of cessation of liability 18. (1) A manufacturer registered under section 13 or 14— (a) who ceases to manufacture taxable goods; or (b) who ceases to be liable to be registered under section 17, as the case may be, shall notify the Director General in writing of that fact and the date of cessation within thirty days from the date of cessation. (2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence. Sales Tax Cancellation of registration 19. (1) Where a registered manufacturer makes a notification under section 18, the Director General may cancel the manufacturer’s registration from the date the registered manufacturer ceased to manufacture taxable goods or ceased to be liable to be registered under section 17, as the case may be, or from such later date as the Director General may determine if he is satisfied that the registered manufacturer can be deregistered. (2) Where there is no notification made under section 18 and the Director General is satisfied that a registered manufacturer has ceased to manufacture taxable goods or has ceased to be liable to be registered under section 17, the Director General may cancel his registration from the date the registered manufacturer ceased to manufacture taxable goods or ceased to be liable to be registered under section 17, as the case may be, or from such later date as the Director General may determine. (3) Where the Director General is satisfied that on the day on which a manufacturer was registered— (a) in the case of a manufacturer who was registered under section 13, the manufacturer was not liable to be registered under section 12 or has ceased to manufacture taxable goods; or (b) in the case of a manufacturer who was registered under section 14, the manufacturer was not manufacturing taxable goods or has ceased to manufacture taxable goods, the Director General may cancel the registration of the manufacturer with effect from the date as determined by the Director General in the notification in writing to such manufacturer. (4) The Director General may cancel the registration of a registered manufacturer under subsection 14(2) if the registered manufacturer is in breach of any conditions imposed in relation to such registration with effect from the date of the breach or from such later date as the Director General may determine. 27 28 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 Exemptions from registration 20. (1) The Minister may, by order published in the Gazette, exempt any class of persons from registration under section 13 subject to such conditions as he deems fit. (2) Notwithstanding that any person is exempted by virtue of subsection (1), such person may apply to be registered as a registered manufacturer and the provisions of this Act shall apply to such person. PART V ACCOUNTING, ASSESSMENT, RECOVERY, ETC. Invoices 21. (1) Every registered manufacturer who sells any taxable goods shall issue an invoice containing prescribed particulars in the national language or English language to the purchaser in respect of the transaction. (2) No invoice showing an amount which purports to be sales tax shall be issued on the sale of any goods— (a) which are not taxable goods; or (b) by a person who is not a registered manufacturer. (3) The amount of sales tax payable shall be collected by the registered manufacturer from the purchaser in addition to the price and any other amount due and payable by the purchaser in respect of the taxable goods. (4) Any person who contravenes subsection (1), (2) or (3) commits an offence. Production of invoices by computer 22. For the purposes of any provision under this Act relating to an invoice, a registered manufacturer shall be treated as having issued an invoice to a purchaser notwithstanding that there is Sales Tax no delivery of any equivalent document in paper form to the purchaser if the prescribed particulars referred to in subsection 21(1) are recorded in a computer and— (a) are transmitted or made available to the purchaser by electronic means; or (b) are produced on any material other than paper and are delivered to the purchaser. Credit notes and debit notes 23. Where any taxable goods is sold by any registered manufacturer which involves the issuance and receipt of credit notes or debit notes under the prescribed circumstances and conditions, the registered manufacturer shall make deduction or addition of sales tax in his returns accordingly, and the credit notes and debit notes shall contain the prescribed particulars Duty to keep records 24. (1) Every taxable person shall keep complete and true records written up to date of all transactions which affect or may affect his liability to sales tax, including the following records: (a) all records of sales of taxable goods by or to that taxable person including invoices, receipts, debit notes and credit notes; (b) all records of importation and exportation of taxable goods; and (c) all other records as the Director General may determine. (2) Any record kept under this section shall be— (a) preserved for a period of seven years from the latest date to which the record relates; (b) in the national language or English language; and 29 30 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (c) kept in Malaysia, except as otherwise approved by the Director General and subject to such conditions as he deems fit. (3) Where the record is in an electronically readable form, the record shall be kept in such manner as to enable the record to be readily accessible and convertible into writing. (4) Where the record is originally in a manual form and is subsequently converted into an electronic form, the record shall be retained in its original form prior to the conversion. (5) A copy of the record shall be admissible in evidence in any proceedings to the same extent as the record itself. (6) Any person who contravenes subsection (1), (2), (3) or (4) commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both. Taxable period 25. (1) The first taxable period of every taxable person shall begin from the date he should have been registered under section 13 and end on the last day of the following month and the subsequent taxable period shall be a period of two months ending on the last day of any month of any calendar year. (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Director General may determine a different taxable period in respect of petroleum subject to such conditions as the Director General deems fit. (3) A taxable person may apply in writing to the Director General for a taxable period other than the period as determined under subsection (1). (4) The Director General may, upon receiving any application under subsection (3)— (a) allow the application and the taxable period shall be the period as applied for Sales Tax (b) refuse the application and the taxable period shall remain as determined under subsection (1); or (c) vary the length of the taxable period or the date on which the taxable period begins or ends. (5) The Director General may, as he deems fit, reassign the taxable person to any taxable period other than the period to which he has been previously determined under subsection (1), (2) or (4). Furnishing of returns and payment of sales tax due and payable 26. (1) Every taxable person shall, in respect of his taxable period, account for the sales tax due in a return as may be prescribed and the return shall be furnished to the Director General in the prescribed manner not later than the last day of the month following the end of his taxable period to which the return relates. (2) W h e r e a t a x a b l e p e r i o d h a s b e e n v a r i e d u n d e r paragraph 25(4)(c) and notwithstanding subsection (1), the return shall be furnished within thirty days from the end of the varied taxable period. (3) Any registered manufacturer who ceases to be liable to be registered under section 17 or ceases to manufacture taxable goods under section 18 shall, not later than thirty days after such cessation, or such later date as the Director General may allow, furnish a return containing particulars as the Director General may determine in respect of that part of the last taxable period during which the manufacturer was registered. (4) Where any registered manufacturer who ceases to carry on business as a manufacturer has in stock any taxable goods on which sales tax due and payable has not been paid and where subsection 11(4) does not apply, such registered manufacturer shall include particulars of those goods in the return to be furnished by him for his last taxable period as if such goods had been sold by him during such taxable period, and he shall pay the sales tax accordingly. 31 32 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (5) Any taxable person who is required to furnish a return under this section shall pay to the Director General the amount of sales tax due and payable by him in respect of the taxable period to which the return relates not later than the last day on which he is required to furnish the return. (6) The return referred to in subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4) shall be furnished whether or not there is sales tax to be paid. (7) Any taxable person who— (a) contravenes subsection (1), (2), (3) or (4); or (b) furnishes an incorrect return, commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both. (8) Any taxable person who fails to pay to the Director General the amount of sales tax due and payable under subsection (5) commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both. (9) Where any sales tax due and payable is not paid wholly or partly by any taxable person after the last day on which it is due and payable under subsection (5) and no prosecution is instituted, the taxable person shall pay— (a) for the first thirty day period that the sales tax is not paid wholly or partly after the expiry of the period specified under subsection (5), a penalty of ten per cent of the amount of sales tax which remains unpaid; (b) for the second thirty day period that the sales tax is not paid wholly or partly after the expiry of the period specified under subsection (5), an additional penalty of fifteen per cent of the amount of sales tax which remains unpaid; and (c) for the third thirty day period that the sales tax is not paid wholly or partly after the expiry of the period specified under subsection (5), an additional penalty of fifteen per cent of the amount of sales tax which remains unpaid Sales Tax (10) Subject to subsection (12), prosecution for the offence under subsection (8) may be instituted after the expiry of the period specified in paragraph (9)(c). (11) The court may order that any taxable person who is convicted for the offence under subsection (8) to pay the penalty as specified in subsection (9). (12) No prosecution for the offence under subsection (8) shall be instituted against any taxable person who has paid the amount of sales tax due and payable, and the penalty specified under subsection (9) within the period specified in subsection (9). Power to assess 27. (1) Where any taxable person— (a) fails to apply for registration under section 13; (b) fails to furnish a return under section 26; or (c) furnishes a return which appears to the Director General to be incomplete or incorrect, the Director General may assess to the best of his judgment the amount of sales tax due and payable, and the penalty payable under subsection 26(9), if any, by the taxable person and shall forthwith notify him of the assessment in writing. (2) Where an amount has been paid to any person as being a refund of sales tax under this Act which ought not to have been paid to him, the Director General may assess the amount of the refund as being sales tax due and payable by him and shall forthwith notify him of the assessment in writing. (3) The assessment under subsections (1) and (2) shall not be made more than six years from the date on which the sales tax was due and payable or from the date on which the refund of sales tax was made, as the case may be, except where in the opinion of the Director General any form of fraud or wilful default has been committed by or on behalf of any person in relation to the 33 34 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 sales tax or refund, the Director General may, for the purposes of making good any loss of sales tax or payment of refund of sales tax attributable to the fraud or wilful default, make an assessment at any time. (4) The proper officer of sales tax may assess the sales tax payable on any taxable goods imported by any person. (5) Where any taxable person has obtained control of any taxable goods or has imported any taxable goods, the Director General may require him to account for the taxable goods. (6) Where the taxable person fails to account for the taxable goods under subsection (5) by reason that— (a) the taxable goods have been sold by him; (b) the taxable goods have been exported or removed by way of sale; or (c) the taxable goods have been lost or destroyed, the Director General may assess to the best of his judgement the amount of sales tax that would have been chargeable in respect of the taxable goods if the goods had been sold by him and shall forthwith notify the taxable person of the assessment in writing. (7) Where— (a) the Director General has made an assessment of sales tax under subsection (1) in respect of paragraph (1)(a) or (b); (b) the sales tax assessed under paragraph (a) has been paid but no return has been furnished for the taxable period to which the assessment relates; and (c) the taxable person fails to furnish a return for any subsequent taxable period, the Director General may, as he deems fit, assess an amount of sales tax greater than that which he otherwise would have considered to be appropriate Sales Tax (8) Where it appears to the Director General that the amount which ought to have been assessed in an assessment under subsection (1), (2), (4), (6) or (7) exceeds the amount which was so assessed, he may— (a) under the same provision as that assessment was made; and (b) within the taxable period during which that assessment could have been made, make a supplementary assessment of the amount of the excess and shall forthwith notify the taxable person in writing accordingly. (9) Where an amount of sales tax and penalty, if any, has been assessed and notified to any taxable person under subsection (1), (2), (6) or (8), it shall be deemed to be an amount of sales tax due and payable, and penalty payable, by him and may be recovered accordingly and the amount of sales tax and penalty, if any, shall be paid by the taxable person, whether or not that taxable person appeals against the assessment, to the Director General unless or except to the extent that the assessment has been withdrawn or reduced by the Director General. (10) The Director General may make any alteration in or addition to the assessment made under this section as he deems fit to ensure the correctness of the assessment and shall forthwith notify the person in writing. Recovery of sales tax, etc., as civil debt 28. (1) Without prejudice to any other remedy and notwithstanding any review or appeal against any decision of the Director General under section 96, any sales tax due and payable, any surcharge accruing, or any penalty, fee or other money payable, under this Act, may be recovered as a civil debt due to the Government. (2) Where an invoice shows a sale of taxable goods as having taken place with sales tax chargeable on the goods, there shall be recoverable from the person who issued the invoice an amount equals to— (a) that which is shown in the invoice as sales tax; or 35 36 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (b) so much of the total amount shown as payable as is to be taken as representing sales tax, if the sales tax is not separately shown in the invoice, for the sale of such taxable goods. (3) Subsection (2) shall apply whether or not— (a) the invoice is an invoice issued under section 21 or 22; (b) the sale of the taxable goods shown on the invoice actually takes or has taken place or the amount shown as sales tax or any amount of sales tax is or was chargeable on the sale of the taxable goods; or (c) the person issuing the invoice is a registered manufacturer, and any amount recoverable from the person under subsection (2) shall be recoverable as such and shall otherwise be recoverable as a civil debt due to the Government. (4) In any proceedings to recover the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money under subsection (1), the production of a certificate signed by the Director General— (a) stating that any sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money and the amount shown in the certificate as due and payable, accruing or payable, in any return, assessment or notice made under this Act from a person named in the certificate; and (b) giving the address of the person and purporting to be a copy of or an extract from any notice of assessment, shall be conclusive evidence of the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money and the amount as due and payable, accruing or payable, in any return, assessment or notice and shall be sufficient authority for the court to give judgement for that amount. (5) Any penalty imposed under this Act shall, for the purposes of this Act and the Limitation Act 1953 [Act 254], the Limitation Ordinance of Sabah [Sabah Cap. 72] or the Limitation Ordinance of Sarawak [Sarawak Cap. 49], as the case may be, be recoverable Sales Tax as if the penalty were sales tax due and payable under this Act and accordingly subsection 6(4) of the Limitation Act 1953, section 3 of the Limitation Ordinance of Sabah or section 3 of the Limitation Ordinance of Sarawak, as the case may be, shall not apply to that penalty. Power to collect sales tax, etc., from person owing money to taxable person 29. (1) Where any sum by way of sales tax is due and payable, surcharge is accrued, or penalty, fee or other money is payable, by a taxable person, the Director General may, by notice in writing, require— (a) any person by whom any money is due or accruing or may become due and payable to the taxable person; (b) any person who holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account of the taxable person; (c) any person who holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account of any other person for payment to the taxable person; or (d) any person having authority from any other person to pay money to the taxable person, to pay to the Director General forthwith, or within such time as the Director General allows, such money, not being salary or wages due or accruing to the taxable person, or so much of such money as is sufficient to pay the sum due and payable, accruing or payable, by the taxable person as aforesaid. (2) A copy of the notice under subsection (1) shall be forwarded to the taxable person at his last known address. (3) All payments made pursuant to a notice under subsection (1) shall be deemed to be made on behalf of the taxable person and with the authority of the taxable person and of all other persons concerned. 37 38 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (4) For the purposes of this section, the Director General may require any person to give him information— (a) as to any money, fund or asset which may be held by the person for any other person; or (b) of any money due and payable by him to any other person. Recovery of sales tax before payable from persons about to leave Malaysia 30. If the Director General has reason to believe that any person is about or is likely to leave Malaysia before any sales tax due by him becomes payable in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the sales tax shall, if the Director General deems fit, be payable on such earlier date as the Director General determines and the person shall be notified accordingly. Recovery of sales tax, etc., from persons about to leave Malaysia without paying sales tax, etc. 31. (1) Where the Director General has reason to believe that any person is about or is likely to leave Malaysia without paying— (a) any sales tax due and payable by him under subsection 26(5); (b) any penalty payable by him under subsection 26(9); (c) any surcharge accrued by him under subsection 32(3); (d) any fee payable by him under this Act; or (e) any other money recoverable from him under this Act, the Director General may issue to the Director General of Immigration a notice containing particulars of the person and the offence committed with a request that the person be prevented from leaving Malaysia unless he pays the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money, or furnishes security to the satisfaction of the Director General for its payment Sales Tax (2) Subject to any order issued or made under any written law for the time being in force relating to immigration, the Director General of Immigration who receives a request under subsection (1) in respect of a person shall exercise all measures which may include the removal and retention of any certificate of identity, passport, exit permit or other travel documents in relation to that person as may be necessary to give effect to the request. (3) The Director General shall cause the notice under subsection (1) to be served personally or by registered post on the person to whom the notice relates. (4) The non receipt of the notice under subsection (1) by that person referred to in subsection (3) shall not invalidate anything done under this section. (5) Where the person in respect of whom a notice has been issued under subsection (1) produces, on or after the date of the notice, a written statement signed by the Director General stating that all the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money specified in the notice have been paid, or that security has been furnished for its payment, that statement shall be sufficient authority for allowing that person to leave Malaysia. (6) No legal proceedings shall be instituted or maintained against the Federal Government, a State Government or any other public officer in respect of anything lawfully done under this section. Payment by instalments 32. (1) The Director General may allow any sales tax due and payable, or penalty payable, to be paid by instalments under the prescribed circumstances in such amounts and on such dates as the Director General may determine. (2) Where the sales tax is allowed to be paid by instalments, the penalty under subsection 26(9) shall cease to be calculated from the date the Director General allows the payment by instalments. (3) Where there is a default in payment of any instalment under subsection (1) on its due date for payment of the balance of the amount due and payable, the whole outstanding balance shall become due and payable on that date and shall, without 39 40 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 any further notice being served on the person liable to pay the amount due, be subject to a surcharge equals to ten per cent of that balance and the surcharge shall be recoverable as if it were due and payable under this Act. (4) Nothing in subsections (1) and (3) shall prejudice the exercise of the rights and powers under this section by the Director General to seize or sell any goods belonging to the person liable to pay such sales tax, penalty or surcharge for recovery of the amount payable under subsections (1) and (3) or any outstanding balance of the sales tax, penalty or surcharge. Goods subject to customs or excise control not to be delivered until sales tax paid as demanded 33. (1) In the case of imported taxable goods, no person shall be entitled to obtain delivery of such goods from the customs control or excise control until the amount of the sales tax assessed by the proper officer of sales tax on those goods has been paid in full. (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), any person may obtain delivery of imported taxable petroleum from the customs control or excise control whether or not any part of or all of the sales tax due and payable on such taxable petroleum have been paid. Liability of directors, etc. 34. (1) Notwithstanding any written law to the contrary, but subject to subsection (2) in relation to a company that is being wound up, where sales tax is due and payable, surcharge is accrued, or penalty, fee or other money is payable, under this Act by any company, limited liability partnership, firm, society or other body of persons— (a) the directors of the company; (b) the compliance officer who is appointed amongst the partners of the limited liability partnership or if no compliance officer is appointed as such, any one or all of the partners of the limited liability partnership; Sales Tax (c) the partners of the firm; (d) the office bearers of the society; or (e) the persons responsible for the management of the body of persons, as the case may be, shall together with the company, limited liability partnership, firm, society or other body of persons be jointly and severally liable for the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money. (2) In relation to a company that is being wound up, the directors of the company shall only be liable where the assets of the company are insufficient to meet the amount due, after paying any sum having priority under the Companies Act 2016 [Act 777] in relation to the application of the assets of the company in the winding up over the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money PART VI EXEMPTION, REFUND, DRAWBACK AND REMISSION Power of Minister to exempt and refund 35. (1) The Minister may, by order published in the Gazette and subject to such conditions as he deems fit, exempt— (a) any goods or class of goods from the whole or any part of the sales tax; or (b) any person or class of persons from payment of the whole or any part of the sales tax which may be charged and levied on any taxable goods manufactured or imported. (2) Any order made under subsection (1) shall be laid before the Dewan Rakyat. (3) The Minister may, in any particular case and subject to such conditions as he deems fit— (a) exempt any person or class of persons from payment of the whole or any part of the sales tax which may be 41 42 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 charged and levied on any taxable goods manufactured or imported; (b) exempt any registered manufacturer or class of registered manufacturers from charging and collecting sales tax on taxable goods; or (c) direct the Director General to make a refund to any person or class of persons of the whole or any part of the sales tax or penalty paid by such persons or class of persons. (4) Where a registered manufacturer sold any taxable goods to a person or class of persons exempted under paragraph (1)(b) or (3)(a), the registered manufacturer shall be exempted from charging and collecting sales tax due and payable on such taxable goods. (5) Where any person who is exempted under paragraph (1)(b) or (3)(a) fails to comply with any conditions to which the exemption relates, any sales tax that has been the subject of the exemption shall become due and payable by the person on the date on which any of the conditions failed to be complied with. (6) Where a person who has been granted exemption under paragraph (1)(b) or (3)(a) has paid any of the sales tax to which the exemption relates and has been granted approval by the Minister for a refund of the amount of the sales tax which has been paid, the person shall be entitled to such refund Claim for refund of sales tax in relation to bad debt 36. (1) Any person who is, or has ceased to be, a registered manufacturer may make a claim to the Director General for a refund of the whole or any part of any sales tax paid by him in respect of taxable goods if— (a) the whole or any part of the sales tax payable to such person has been written off in his accounts as bad debts; and (b) the Director General is satisfied that all reasonable efforts have been made by such person to recover the sales tax. Sales Tax (2) Where the person who makes a claim for a refund under subsection (1) in relation to bad debt— (a) has not received any payment in respect of the sale of taxable goods, such person may make a claim for a refund of the whole of the sales tax paid; or (b) has received any payment in respect of the taxable goods, such person may make a claim for the difference between the sales tax paid and the amount calculated in accordance with the following formula: A B x C where A is the payment received in respect of the sale of such taxable goods; is the sale value of such taxable goods plus sales tax payable on such taxable goods; and is the sales tax payable on such taxable goods. (3) The person referred to in subsection (1) may make a claim for a refund of the whole or any part of any sales tax in relation to the bad debt within six years from the date the sales tax is paid by him and the Director General may refund the whole or any part of the sales tax after being satisfied that the person has properly established the claim. (4) For the purposes of this section, “bad debt” means an outstanding amount of the payment in respect of the sale of taxable goods including the sales tax which is due to a person who is, or has ceased to be, a registered manufacturer but has not been paid to, and is irrecoverable by, the person. Repayment of sales tax in relation to bad debt 37. Where a refund of sales tax has been made under section 36 by the Director General to the person referred to in subsection 36(1) 43 44 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 and any payment in respect of the sale of taxable goods for which the sales tax is payable is subsequently received by the person, the person shall repay to the Director General an amount calculated in accordance with the following formula: A x C B where A is the payment received in respect of the sale of such taxable goods; is the sale value of such taxable goods plus sales tax payable on such taxable goods; and is the sales tax payable on such taxable goods. Payment of sales tax, etc., short paid or erroneously refunded 38. (1) Where— (a) the whole or any part of any sales tax due and payable, surcharge accrued, or penalty, fee or other money payable, under this Act has not been paid by a person; or (b) the whole or any part of any sales tax due and payable, surcharge accrued, or penalty, fee or other money payable, after having been paid, has been erroneously refunded to a person, the Director General shall demand from the person to pay the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money, or the deficient sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money, or to repay the refund erroneously paid to him. (2) The demand under subsection (1) shall be made within six years from the date on which— (a) the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money was payable, or the deficient sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money was paid; or (b) the refund was made. Sales Tax (3) Upon receipt of the demand under subsection (1), the person shall— (a) pay the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money, or the deficient sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money; or (b) repay the refund erroneously paid to him. (4) Without prejudice to subsection (1), any goods belonging to the person referred to in subsection (1), which may be in customs control or excise control or at a place specified in the registration under section 13, may be seized until the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money, or the deficient sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money, are paid, or the refund erroneously paid to him is repaid. (5) If the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money or the deficient sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money, or the refund to be repaid remains unpaid, as the case maybe, the Director General may sell such goods seized under subsection (4)— (a) after giving not less than thirty days’ notice in writing to the person or his agent if the name and address of such person or agent is known to the Director General; or (b) after giving due notice in the Gazette if the name and address of such person or his agent is not known to the Director General. (6) The proceeds of the sale of any goods seized under subsection (4) shall be applied to the payment of— (a) the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money; (b) the deficient sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money; (c) the refund erroneously paid; or 45 46 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (d) the recovery of the amount due or other charges which may be due in respect of selling off such goods, and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person, and if the person cannot be found within one month of the sale, such surplus shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund. (7) If at the sale of any goods seized under subsection (4) no sufficient bid is forthcoming to defray the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money payable or the deficient sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money payable or the refund erroneously paid, as the case may be, the goods shall be forfeited to the Government and shall be disposed of in such manner as the Director General may direct. (8) Every auction sales of any goods seized under subsection (4) shall be conducted by or in the presence of a senior officer of sales tax. Refund of sales tax, etc., overpaid or erroneously paid 39. (1) Any person who— (a) has overpaid or erroneously paid any sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money; or (b) is entitled to the refund under subsection 35(6) or 41(3), may make a claim for refund in the prescribed form. (2) A claim for refund under subsection (1) shall be made to the Director General within one year from the time— (a) such overpayment or erroneous payment occurred; or (b) such entitlement of the refund under subsection 35(6) or 41(3) occurred. (3) The Director General may make such refund in respect of the claim under subsection (1) after being satisfied that the person has properly established the claim. Sales Tax (4) The Director General may reduce or disallow any refund due in respect of the claim under subsection (1) to the extent that the refund would unjustly enrich the person referred to in subsection (1). (5) A claim for refund under this section shall be supported by such evidence as required by the Director General. Drawback 40. (1) The Director General may allow drawback of the full amount of sales tax paid by a person in respect of taxable goods which are subsequently exported by the person from Malaysia subject to the regulations made under this Act. (2) This section shall not apply to petroleum Remission of sales tax, etc. 41. (1) The Minister may remit the whole or any part of the sales tax due and payable under this Act where he deems fit. (2) The Director General may remit the whole or any part of the surcharge accrued, or penalty, fee or other money payable, under this Act where he deems fit. (3) Where a person who has been granted remission under subsection (1) or (2) has paid any of the sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money to which the remission relates, he shall be entitled to a refund of the amount of sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fee or other money which had been remitted. PART VII RULING Public ruling 42. (1) The Director General may, at any time, make a public ruling on the application of any provision of this Act in relation to any person or class of persons, or any type of business activities. 47 48 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (2) The Director General may withdraw, either wholly or partly, any public ruling made under this section. (3) Notwithstanding any provision of this Act, where a public ruling under subsection (1) applies to any person in relation to a business activity and the person applies the provision in the manner stated in the ruling, the Director General shall apply the provision in relation to the person and the business activities in accordance with the ruling. Customs ruling 43. (1) Any person may apply, in the prescribed form together with the prescribed fee, to the Director General for a customs ruling in respect of any one or more of the following matters: (a) the classification of taxable goods; (b) the determination of a taxable person; (c) the principles to be adopted for the purposes of determination of sale value of taxable goods; or (d) any other matters as determined by the Director General. (2) An application for a customs ruling under subsection (1) may be made— (a) in respect of imported goods— (i) at any time before the goods, that are the subject matter of the application, are to be imported or intended to be imported into Malaysia; or (ii) at any later time, if permitted by the Director General; or (b) in respect of manufactured goods— (i) at any time before the goods, that are the subject matter of the application, are to be manufactured; or Sales Tax (ii) at any later time, if permitted by the Director General. (3) An applicant may withdraw his application at any time before a customs ruling is made and any payment made relating to the application for the customs ruling shall be forfeited by the Director General. Making of customs ruling 44. (1) Subject to subsection (3), the Director General shall make a customs ruling in respect of any matter specified in the application made under section 43 and such customs ruling shall bind the applicant. (2) Any customs ruling made under subsection (1) may be subject to such conditions as the Director General deems fit. (3) The Director General may decline to make a customs ruling if, in his opinion— (a) the information given by the applicant is insufficient to do so; (b) the application is for a hypothetical situation; or (c) any pending appeal under section 96 involves the subject matter referred to in the application. Amendment, modification or revocation of customs ruling 45. (1) A customs ruling may be amended, modified or revoked by the Director General if— (a) the customs ruling contains an error which needs to be corrected; (b) the customs ruling was based on an error of fact or law; (c) there is a change in law relating to sales tax; or (d) there is a change in the material fact or circumstances on which the customs ruling was based. 49 50 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (2) The Director General shall, immediately after making the amendment, modification or revocation, give notice in writing to the applicant referred to in section 43 of the amendment, modification or revocation and, subject to subsection (3), such amended, modified or revoked customs ruling shall take effect from the date stated in the notice. (3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), where a customs ruling has the effect of causing or increasing any sales tax liability in respect of any taxable goods, and— (a) the taxable goods are imported within three months of the date the notice of the amendment, modification or revocation is given pursuant to a binding contract entered into before that date; (b) the taxable goods have left the place of manufacture or warehouse in the country from which the goods are being exported for direct shipment to Malaysia on the date the notice of the amendment, modification or revocation of the customs ruling is given; or (c) the taxable goods are imported on or before the date the notice of the amendment, modification or revocation is given but have not been released for home consumption, the customs ruling which was made prior to the amendment, modification or revocation under this section shall be applied to such taxable goods. (4) Notwithstanding subsection (2) and subject to section 39, if the amendment, modification or revocation of a customs ruling has the effect of decreasing any sales tax liability in respect of any taxable goods, any higher sales tax that has been paid shall be treated as if the higher sales tax has been paid in error Director General to declare customs rulings to be null, etc. 46. The Director General shall, by a notice, declare a customs ruling made under section 44 to be null, void and of no effect if the ruling has been obtained by the applicant referred to in section 43 by way of fraud, misrepresentation or falsification of facts. Sales Tax Different customs rulings on same subject matter 47. Where an applicant referred to in section 43 receives two or more different customs rulings on the same subject matter, such rulings shall be treated as being null and void, and such applicant shall immediately notify the Director General who shall, within thirty days from the date of notification, make a new customs ruling. PART VIII SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO DESIGNATED AREAS Interpretation 48. In this Part, “Malaysia” excludes the designated areas and the special areas. Application 49. For the purposes of this Part, this Act shall not apply to any taxable goods manufactured in the designated areas other than petroleum. Sales tax relating to taxable goods imported into or transported to or from designated areas 50. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act— (a) no sales tax shall be levied and payable on any taxable goods— (i) imported into the designated areas or transported to the designated areas from Malaysia; (ii) transported between the designated areas; or (iii) transported from the designated areas to the special areas, 51 52 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 other than any taxable goods which the Minister may from time to time declare by order published in the Gazette; (b) sales tax shall be levied and payable on all taxable goods transported to Malaysia from the designated areas as if such transportation to Malaysia were importation into Malaysia; and (c) the sale value of taxable goods liable to sales tax in accordance with paragraph (b) shall be determined in accordance with subsection 9(2). Transportation of taxable goods from or to designated areas to or from Malaysia 51. (1) Where taxable goods are transported— (a) from the designated areas to Malaysia; or (b) from Malaysia to the designated areas, the provisions of this Act shall, with such modifications and adaptations as may be necessary, apply as if such goods were imported into, or exported from, Malaysia from or to a place outside Malaysia. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), Part X shall apply to— (a) taxable goods transported to or from the designated areas from or to Malaysia; and (b) persons, and vehicles, vessels and aircrafts, transporting such goods Declaration of taxable goods transported from designated areas to Malaysia 52. The person in charge of any vehicle, vessel or aircraft on which taxable goods are transported from the designated areas to Malaysia shall make a declaration substantially in the form as prescribed under the Customs Act 1967 giving particulars of the taxable goods transported in such vehicle, vessel or aircraft. Sales Tax Collection of sales tax in designated areas 53. In making regulations under section 106, the Minister may provide— (a) for the collection in the designated areas of sales tax payable in respect of taxable goods transported or about to be transported from or to the designated areas to or from Malaysia; (b) for the limitation or restriction of vehicles, vessels and aircrafts which may be used to transport taxable goods; and (c) for the licensing or control of persons, or vehicles, vessels or aircrafts, transporting taxable goods. Application of section 40 to taxable goods transported to designated areas 54. Section 40 shall apply to taxable goods, other than any goods declared by the Minister under paragraph 50(a) to be taxable on importation into the designated areas, transported from Malaysia to the designated areas as if such goods had been exported or re exported, as the case may be. PART IX SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO SPECIAL AREAS Interpretation 55. In this Part, “Malaysia” excludes the special areas and the designated areas. Application 56. For the purposes of this Part, this Act shall not apply to any taxable goods manufactured in the special areas. 53 54 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 Sales tax relating to taxable goods imported into or transported to or from special areas 57. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act— (a) no sales tax shall be levied and payable on any taxable goods— (i) imported into the special areas or transported to the special areas from Malaysia; (ii) transported between the special areas; or (iii) transported from the special areas to the designated areas, other than any taxable goods which the Minister may from time to time declare by order published in the Gazette; (b) sales tax shall be levied and payable on all taxable goods transported to Malaysia from the special areas as if such transportation to Malaysia were importation into Malaysia; and (c) the sale value of taxable goods liable to sales tax in accordance with paragraph (b) shall be determined in accordance with subsection 9(2) Transportation of taxable goods from or to special areas to or from Malaysia 58. (1) Where taxable goods are transported— (a) from the special areas to Malaysia; or (b) from Malaysia to the special areas, the provisions of this Act shall, with such modifications and adaptations as may be necessary, apply as if such goods were imported into, or exported from, Malaysia from or to a place outside Malaysia. Sales Tax (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), Part X shall apply to— (a) taxable goods transported to or from the special areas from or to Malaysia; and (b) persons, and vehicles, vessels and aircrafts, transporting such goods. Declaration of taxable goods transported from special areas to Malaysia 59. The person in charge of any vehicle, vessel or aircraft on which taxable goods are transported from the special areas to Malaysia shall make a declaration substantially in the form as prescribed under the Customs Act 1967 giving particulars of the taxable goods transported in such vehicle, vessel or aircraft. Collection of sales tax in special areas 60. In making regulations under section 106, the Minister may provide— (a) for the collection in the special areas of sales tax payable in respect of taxable goods transported or about to be transported from or to the special areas to or from Malaysia; (b) for the limitation or restriction of vehicles, vessels or aircrafts which may be used to transport taxable goods; and (c) for the licensing or control of persons, or vehicles, vessels or aircrafts, transporting taxable goods. Application of section 40 to taxable goods transported to special areas 61. Section 40 shall apply to taxable goods, other than any goods declared by the Minister under paragraph 57(a) to be taxable on importation into the special areas, transported from Malaysia to the special areas as if such goods had been exported or re exported, as the case may be. 55 56 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 PART X ENFORCEMENT Persons bound to give information 62. (1) Every person having information about any matter into which it is the duty of the proper officer of sales tax to inquire shall, upon being required by the officer to do so, give such information. (2) Every person required by the proper officer of sales tax to produce any goods, documents, articles or things which are within the power of such person to produce, and which are— (a) goods, documents, articles or things used in any transaction or other matter relating to sales tax; or (b) goods, documents, articles or things into which it is the duty of the proper officer of sales tax to inquire under this Act, shall produce the goods, documents, articles or things. (3) Where any information, goods, documents, articles or things are not in the national language or English language, any proper officer of sales tax may by notice in writing require the supplier or, on the supplier’s default, any other person, to produce within a reasonable period a translation of the information, goods, documents, articles or things in the national language or English language as the proper officer of sales tax may determine. (4) Any person— (a) who contravenes subsection (1) or (2); or (b) who fails to produce a translation as required under subsection (3), commits an offence Sales Tax Power to take samples 63. (1) Any senior officer of sales tax may at any time, if his duties so require, take samples of any goods— (a) to ascertain whether the samples are goods of a description liable to sales tax; (b) to ascertain the sales tax payable on such goods; or (c) for such other purposes as he may deem necessary, and such samples may be disposed of in such manner as he may direct. (2) No payment shall be made for any sample taken under subsection (1), but the proper officer of sales tax shall give a receipt for such sample. Access to places or premises 64. (1) For the purposes of this Act, any senior officer of sales tax shall at all times have access to any place or premises where a manufacturer or importer carries on his business. (2) Where any senior officer of sales tax exercises his powers under subsection (1), the person who carries on his business or any other person present at the place or premises at that time of entry shall provide to the officer all reasonable facilities and assistance for the exercise of his duties under this section. (3) Where any senior officer of sales tax enters upon any place or premises in accordance with this section, he may— (a) require the manufacturer or importer, as the case may be, to produce any goods, documents, articles or things, which such manufacturer or importer is required to keep under the provisions of this Act, or which relates to any taxable goods; (b) examine any goods, documents, articles or things and take copies of any documents; 57 58 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (c) seize and detain any goods, documents, articles or things which, in his opinion, may afford evidence of the commission of any offence under this Act; (d) require any manufacturer or importer, or any person employed by such manufacturer or importer, to answer questions relating to any goods, documents, articles or things, or any entry in any document, or any taxable goods; (e) require any container, envelop or other receptacle in such place or premises to be opened; (f) at the risk and expense of the manufacturer or importer, open and examine any package, or any goods or materials, in such place or premises; or (g) take samples of any goods in accordance with section 63. (4) Where the senior officer of sales tax acting under this section is unable to obtain access to any place or premises where a manufacturer or importer carries on his business, or to any receptacle contained in the place or premises, he may, at any time, enter such place or premises, and open such receptacle in such manner, if necessary by force, as he may think necessary. (5) Where, on the entry upon any place or premises under the provisions of this section, any taxable goods are found in relation to which any offence under the provisions of this Act has been committed, such taxable goods shall be liable to forfeiture. (6) Any person who contravenes subsection (2) commits an offence Access to recorded information or computerized data 65. (1) Any senior officer of sales tax exercising his powers under sections 64, 66, 67 and 68 shall be given access to any recorded information or computerized data, whether stored in a computer or otherwise. Sales Tax (2) In addition, a senior officer of sales tax exercising his powers under sections 64, 66, 67 and 68— (a) may inspect the operation of any computer and any associated apparatus or material which he has reasonable cause to suspect is or has been used in connection with the information or data; and (b) may require— (i) the person by whom or on whose behalf the senior officer of sales tax has reasonable cause to suspect the computer is or has been so used in connection with the information or data; or (ii) the person having charge of, or is otherwise concerned with, the operation of the computer, apparatus or material in connection with the information or data, to provide the officer with such reasonable assistance as he may require for the purposes of this section. (3) For the purposes of subsection (1), “access” includes being provided with the necessary password, encryption code, decryption code, software or hardware and any other means required to enable comprehension of recorded information or computerized data. Magistrate may issue search warrant 66. (1) Whenever it appears to any Magistrate, upon written information upon oath and after any inquiry which he may think necessary, that there is reasonable cause to believe that in any place, premises or conveyance, there are concealed or deposited any goods, documents, articles or things which may afford evidence of the commission of an offence under this Act, the Magistrate may issue a warrant authorizing any senior officer of sales tax named therein, at any time and with or without assistance— (a) to enter the place, premises or conveyance and to search for and seize the goods, documents, articles or things; and 59 60 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (b) to arrest any person being in the place, premises or conveyance in whose possession the goods, documents, articles or things are found or who may reasonably be suspected as having concealed or deposited such goods, documents, articles or things. (2) The senior officer of sales tax authorized under subsection (1) may, if it is necessary so to do— (a) break open any outer or inner door of the place, premises or conveyance and enter every part thereof, if necessary forcibly; (b) remove by force any obstruction to the entry to search or to seize as he is empowered to effect; and (c) detain every person found in the place, premises or conveyance until the search has been completed. Search may be made without warrant 67. Whenever it appears to the senior officer of sales tax that there is reasonable cause to believe that in any place, premises or conveyance there are concealed or deposited any goods, documents, articles or things which may afford evidence of the commission of any offence under this Act and if he has reasonable grounds for believing that by reason of the delay in obtaining a search warrant the goods, documents, articles or things are likely to be removed, he may exercise in, upon and in respect of the place, premises or conveyance, all the powers under section 66 in the same manner as if he was empowered so to do by a warrant issued under that section. Power to stop and search conveyance 68. (1) The proper officer of sales tax may stop and examine any conveyance for the purposes of ascertaining whether any goods in respect of which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been committed are contained in the conveyance. Sales Tax (2) If required so to do by the proper officer of sales tax, the person in control or in charge of the conveyance— (a) shall stop the conveyance and allow the proper officer of sales tax to examine it; (b) shall move the conveyance to another place for examination; and (c) shall not proceed with the journey until permission to do so has been given by the proper officer of sales tax. (3) The person in control or in charge of the conveyance examined under this section shall, on the request of the proper officer of sales tax, open all parts of the conveyance for examination by the proper officer of sales tax and take all measures necessary to enable the examination as the proper officer of sales tax considers necessary to be made Seizure of goods, etc., the subject of an offence 69. (1) Any proper officer of sales tax may seize in any place either on land or in the territorial waters any of the following: (a) all goods, documents, articles or things in respect of which the proper officer of sales tax has reasonable cause to suspect that there has been committed any offence under this Act, any violation of any of the provisions of this Act, or any breach of any conditions subject to which a registration has been approved under sections 13 and 14; (b) any receptacle, package or conveyance in which the goods, documents, articles or things may have been found or which have been used in connection with the offence, violation or breach referred to in paragraph (a); and (c) any other goods, documents, articles or things which may reasonably be believed to have a bearing on the offence, violation or breach referred to in paragraph (a). 61 62 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (2) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(b)— (a) if the conveyance is a vessel, the vessel shall not exceed two hundred tonnes net of its registered tonnage; or (b) if the conveyance is an aircraft, the aircraft is other than an aircraft engaged in international carriage. (3) Whenever any goods, documents, articles, things, receptacles, packages or conveyances are seized under this Act, the proper officer of sales tax shall forthwith give notice in writing of the seizure and the grounds thereof to the owner of the goods, documents, articles, things, receptacles, packages or conveyances, if known, either by delivering the notice to him personally or by post at his place of abode. (4) The provision of this section relating to the seizure of— (a) any goods, documents, articles or things shall apply to all contents of any receptacles, packages or conveyances in which the goods, documents, articles or things are found, and to any article used to conceal the goods, documents, articles or things; and (b) any conveyance shall apply to the tackle, equipment and furnishings of the conveyance and if the conveyance is an animal vehicle, to any animal by which the conveyance is drawn Proportional examination or testing of goods seized 70. (1) When any goods suspected of being taxable goods or otherwise liable to seizure have been seized, it shall be sufficient to open and examine five per centum only of each description of the package or receptacle in which such goods are contained. (2) If it is necessary to test any goods seized under this Act, it shall be sufficient to test only a sample not exceeding five per centum in volume or weight of the goods examined under subsection (1). Sales Tax (3) The court shall presume that the goods contained in the unopened packages or receptacles are of the same nature, quantity and quality as those found in the similar packages or receptacles which have been opened. Return or disposal of goods, etc. 71. (1) For the purpose of investigation, where any goods have been seized under this Part, a senior officer of sales tax may, at his discretion— (a) temporarily return the goods to the owner thereof or to the person from whose possession, custody or control the goods were seized, or to any person as the senior officer of sales tax may consider entitled to the goods, subject to such terms and conditions as the senior officer of sales tax may impose and to sufficient security being furnished to the satisfaction of the senior officer of sales tax that the goods shall be surrendered to the senior officer of sales tax on demand being made by the senior officer of sales tax and that the said terms and conditions, if any, shall be complied with; (b) return the goods to the owner thereof or to the person from whose possession, custody or control the goods were seized, or to such person as the senior officer of sales tax may consider entitled to such goods, with liberty for the person to whom the goods are so returned to dispose of the same; or (c) sell or destroy the goods, as appropriate in the circumstances, where the goods are living creatures or where, in the opinion of the senior officer of sales tax, the goods are of a perishable or dangerous nature or likely to speedily deteriorate in quality or value, and where the goods are sold, the senior officer of sales tax shall hold the proceeds of sale to abide the result of any prosecution or claim. (2) The return of goods under paragraph (1)(b) shall be subject to security being furnished to the satisfaction of the senior officer 63 64 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 of sales tax in an amount not less than an amount which, in the opinion of the senior officer of sales tax, represents— (a) the sale value of the goods, on the date on which the goods are so returned; and (b) the sales tax due and payable in respect of the goods, if any, for the payment of the amount secured to the Director General in the event of the court making an order for the forfeiture under section 81. (3) Whenever any goods are returned or disposed of under subsection (1), a document purporting to be a certificate in accordance with subsection 74(2) shall be issued by the senior officer of sales tax. (4) Any person who— (a) fails to surrender on demand to a senior officer of sales tax the goods temporarily returned to him under paragraph (1)(a); or (b) fails to comply with or contravenes any of the terms or conditions imposed under paragraph (1)(a), commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding ten thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to both. (5) The criminal liability of any person under subsection (4) shall be in addition to any other liability that the said person or any other person may incur under the terms and conditions relating to the return of the goods under paragraph (1)(a). (6) The provisions of subsection (4) shall not apply to a person who is the guarantor or surety of the person to whom the goods are returned under paragraph (1)(a). (7) The Minister may, either generally or in any particular case or class of cases, give such directions to the Director General as he may deem necessary or expedient with regard to the exercise of the powers conferred on the senior officer of sales tax under subsection (1). Sales Tax Power of arrest 72. (1) Any proper officer of sales tax may arrest without warrant— (a) any person found committing or attempting to commit, or employing or aiding any person to commit, or abetting the commission of, an offence under this Act; (b) any person whom he may reasonably suspect to have in his possession any goods, documents, articles or things liable to seizure under this Act; or (c) any person whom he may reasonably suspect to have committed an offence under this Act. (2) The proper officer of sales tax may search or cause to be searched any person arrested under subsection (1) provided that— (a) any person who requests that his person be searched in the presence of a senior officer of sales tax shall not be searched except in the presence of and under the supervision of such senior officer of sales tax, but such person may be detained until the arrival of such senior officer of sales tax, or taken to any office or police station where such senior officer of sales tax may be found; (b) the goods and baggage of the person who requests to be present when the goods and baggage are searched and so presents himself within a reasonable time shall not be searched except in his presence; and (c) no person shall be searched except by another person of the same gender, and such search shall be conducted with strict regard to decency. (3) Any proper officer of sales tax making an arrest under subsection (1) shall, without unnecessary delay, bring the person arrested to the nearest police station, and thereafter the person shall be dealt with in accordance with the law relating to criminal procedure for the time being in force. 65 66 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (4) If any person liable to be arrested under this Act is not arrested at the time of committing the offence for which he is so liable, or after arrest makes his escape, he may at any time thereafter be arrested and dealt with as if he had been arrested at the time of committing such offence. (5) Any proper officer of sales tax may cause to be taken photographs, finger and thumb impressions and any other form of identification that may be required under any other written law of any person charged with an offence against this Act. (6) Every person so arrested may be released from custody— (a) on his depositing such reasonable sum of money as the proper officer of sales tax may require; (b) on his executing a bond, with such surety or sureties, as the proper officer of sales tax may require; or (c) on his depositing such reasonable sum of money as the proper officer of sales tax may require and his executing a bond, with such surety or sureties, as the proper officer of sales tax may require. (7) Any person who has been released from custody under subsection (6) may be arrested without warrant by any proper officer of sales tax— (a) if such officer has reasonable grounds for believing that any conditions subject to which such person was released or otherwise admitted to bail has been or is likely to be breached; or (b) on being notified in writing by the surety of such person that such person is likely to breach any conditions subject to which such person was released and that the surety wishes to be relieved of his obligation as surety. Sales Tax PART XI TRIALS AND PROCEEDINGS Jurisdiction to try offences 73. Notwithstanding any written law to the contrary, a Sessions Court shall have jurisdiction to try any offence under this Act and to impose punishment under this Act for any such offence. Evidence by certificate, etc. 74. (1) Any certificate signed by the Director General stating that— (a) a manufacturer was or was not, on any date, registered under this Act; (b) any return has not been furnished or had not been furnished on any date; (c) any sales tax shown as due and payable in any return or assessment has not been paid; (d) any penalty and the amount of the penalty shown as due from a person named in the certificate; or (e) any public ruling is made under section 42 or customs ruling is made under section 43, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated in the certificate without proof of the signature to the certificate. (2) In any proceedings in respect of any offence under this Act in which the existence, description, classification, composition, quantity, quality or value of, or any other matter in relation to, any goods returned, sold or destroyed under section 71 is in question, any document produced by the Public Prosecutor purporting to be a certificate in respect of any of the matter given and signed by— (a) an analyst within the meaning of subsection 75(4); 67 68 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (b) a senior officer of sales tax; or (c) any person, regardless whether or not he is a public officer, authorized by or on behalf of the Minister either generally or in any particular case, for the purposes of this section, shall be admissible in evidence and its conclusiveness shall not be challenged on the ground that the goods in respect of which the certificate is given has not been produced before the court either in part or in entirety, and it shall be evidence of its contents, including the facts stated in the certificate, without proof of the signature to the certificate. Production of certificate of analysis 75. (1) In any prosecution under this Act, a certificate of analysis purporting to be under the hand of an analyst shall, on the production of the certificate by the Public Prosecutor, be sufficient evidence of the facts stated in the certificate unless the accused requires that the analyst be called as a witness, in which case he shall give notice thereof to the Public Prosecutor not less than three clear days before the commencement of the trial. (2) Where the Public Prosecutor intends to give in evidence any certificate of analysis, he shall deliver a copy of the certificate to the accused not less than ten clear days before the commencement of the trial. (3) Analysts are bound to state the truth in the certificate of analysis under their hands. (4) In this section, “analyst” means— (a) a registered chemist under the Chemists Act 1975 [Act 158] or a person authorized under section 23A of such Act, or his employee working under his supervision; (b) a registered pharmacist under the Registration of Pharmacists Act 1951 [Act 371] or his employee working under his supervision; Sales Tax (c) a registered engineer under the Registration of Engineers Act 1967 [Act 138]; or (d) a registered geologist under the Geologists Act 2008 [Act 689]. (5) If an analyst is called as a witness by the accused under subsection (1), the analyst shall be called at the expense of the accused unless the court otherwise directs. (6) The Minister may appoint any qualified person or class of qualified persons, by notification in the Gazette, to be an analyst for the purpose of this section Proof as to registration or licensing of conveyances in Malaysia or Singapore 76. Where in any prosecution under this Act it is relevant to ascertain particulars as to the registration or licensing of any conveyance registered or licensed in any port or place in Malaysia or Singapore, a certificate purporting to be signed by the officer responsible under any written law in Malaysia or in Singapore for the registration or licensing of the conveyance shall be prima facie evidence as to all particulars concerning the registration or licensing contained in the certificate, and the burden of proving the incorrectness of any particulars stated in such certificate shall be on the person denying the same. Manner of seizure not to be enquired into on trial before court or on appeal 77. In any trial before any court or in any proceedings on appeal relating to the seizure of goods subject to forfeiture under this Act, the court shall proceed to the trial or hear the appeal on the merits of the case only, without enquiring into the manner or form of making any seizure, except in so far as the manner and form of seizure may be evidence of such merits. 69 70 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 Obligation of secrecy 78. (1) Except as provided under section 79, the name, identification card number, passport number and address of an informer, or any other information which can lead to the identity of the informer, and the substance of the information received from an informer shall be kept secret and shall not be disclosed by any officer of sales tax or any person who in the ordinary course of his duties comes into possession of, or has control of or access to, the information to any person except the proper officer of sales tax. (2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to both. Protection of informers from discovery 79. (1) Except as hereinafter provided, no witness in any civil or criminal proceedings shall be obliged or permitted to disclose the name, address or any information of an informer, or the substance of the information received from an informer, or state any matter which might lead to the discovery of the informer. (2) If any documents which are produced in evidence or liable to inspection in any civil or criminal proceedings contain any entry in which any informer is named or described or which might lead to his discovery, the court shall cause all the passages to be concealed from view or to be obliterated so far only as may be necessary to protect the informer from discovery. (3) If in the trial for any offence under this Act the court, after full enquiry into the case, believes that the informer wilfully made in his complaint a material statement which he knew to be false or did not believe to be true, or if in any other proceedings the court is of the opinion that justice cannot fully be done between the parties thereto without the discovery of the informer, it shall be lawful for the court to require the production of the original complaint, if in writing, and permit enquiry and require full disclosure concerning the informer. Sales Tax Goods liable to seizure liable to forfeiture 80. (1) All goods liable to seizure under the provisions of this Act shall be liable to forfeiture. (2) For the purposes of this section and of sections 71, 81, 82, 83 and 85, the word “goods” shall be deemed to include receptacles and conveyances. (3) All goods forfeited shall be delivered to a proper officer of sales tax and shall be disposed of in accordance with the directions of the Director General. Court to order disposal of goods seized 81. (1) An order for the forfeiture or for the release of any goods liable to forfeiture under this Act shall be made by the court before which the prosecution with regard to the forfeiture has been held, and an order for the forfeiture of goods shall be made if it is proved to the satisfaction of the court that— (a) an offence under this Act has been committed; and (b) the goods were the subject matter of or were used in the commission of the offence notwithstanding that no person may have been convicted of any offence under this Act. (2) The amount secured under paragraph 71(1)(a) or subsection 71(2) or the amount realized by sale under paragraph 71(1)(c) shall be forfeited by the court if it is proved to the satisfaction of the court that an offence under this Act has been committed and that the goods in respect of which the amount was secured or realized by sale, as the case may be, was the subject matter of or was used in the commission of the offence notwithstanding that no person may have been convicted of the offence. Goods seized in respect of which there is no prosecution, or the proceeds of sale thereof, are forfeited if not claimed 82. (1) If there is no prosecution with regard to any goods seized under this Act, the goods or the proceeds of sale of the goods which are held pursuant to paragraph 71(1)(c) shall be deemed to 71 72 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 be forfeited at the expiration of thirty days from the date of the notice of the seizure of the goods is given under subsection 69(3) unless, before the expiration— (a) a claim to the goods or the proceeds of sale of the goods is made under subsection (2); (b) a written application is made for the return of the goods under paragraph 71(1)(a) or (b); or (c) the goods are returned under paragraph paragraph 71(1)(a) or (b). (2) Any person asserting that he is the owner of the goods or the proceeds of sale of the goods, as the case may be, and that the goods or the proceeds of sale of the goods are not liable to forfeiture may, personally or by his agent authorized in writing, give written notice to any senior officer of sales tax that he claims the same. (3) If there is a claim or a written application made within the period of thirty days referred to in subsection (1) and there is no prosecution with regard to the goods, the senior officer of sales tax shall, on the expiration of the period of thirty days, refer the claim or the application to the Director General. (4) Upon reference by the senior officer of sales tax under subsection (3), the Director General may direct such senior officer of sales tax— (a) to release such goods or the proceeds of sale of such goods or the security furnished under paragraph 71(1)(a) or subsection 71(2); or (b) by information in the prescribed form, to refer the matter to a Sessions Court Judge for a decision. (5) The Sessions Court shall issue a summons requiring the person asserting that he is the owner of the goods or the proceeds of sale of the goods, and the person from whom the goods were seized, to appear before him, and upon their appearance or default to appear, due service of the summons being proved, the Sales Tax Sessions Court shall proceed to the examination of the matter, and upon proof that an offence against this Act has been committed and that the goods were the subject matter or were used in the commission of the offence— (a) shall order the goods or the proceeds of sale of the goods or the amount secured under paragraph 71(1)(a) or subsection 71(2) to be forfeited; or (b) in the absence of such proof, may order the release of the goods or the proceeds of sale of the goods or the security furnished under paragraph 71(1)(a) or subsection 71(2). (6) In any proceedings under subsection (6), section 83 shall apply to the person asserting that he is the owner of the goods or the proceeds of sale of the goods and to the person from whom the goods were seized as if the owner or person had been the accused in a prosecution under this Act. Burden of proof 83. Where any dispute arises in any prosecution as to whether— (a) any sales tax has been paid; (b) any goods seized have been lawfully imported or exported; (c) any goods are not taxable goods; or (d) the accused is entitled to an exemption from sales tax, the burden of proof of such dispute shall lie on the accused in the prosecution. Court order 84. (1) Where any person is found guilty of an offence under this Act, the court before which that person is found guilty shall order the person to pay to the Director General the amount of sales tax due and payable, or penalty payable, under this Act, if any, as certified by the Director General and such sales tax 73 74 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 or penalty shall be recoverable in the same manner as a fine as provided under section 283 of the Criminal Procedure Code [Act 593]. (2) In addition to subsection (1), the court has civil jurisdiction to the extent of the amount of sales tax due and payable, or penalty payable and the order is enforceable in all respects as a final judgement of the court in favour of the Director General. (3) Where any person is found not guilty of an offence under this Act, and if he has paid the amount of sales tax due and payable, or penalty payable, under this Act pursuant to section 100 in respect of the offence charged, the court may order the amount paid to be refunded to such person where no notice of appeal is filed. No costs or damages arising from seizure to be recoverable unless seizure without reasonable or probable cause 85. No person shall, in any proceedings before any court in respect of the seizure of any goods, documents, articles or things in exercise or the purported exercise of any power conferred under this Act, be entitled to the costs of the proceedings or to any damages or other relief, other than an order for the return of such goods, documents, articles or things or the payment of the value of such goods, documents, articles or things, unless such seizure was made without reasonable or probable cause PART XII GENERAL Evasion of sales tax 86. (1) Any person who, with intent to evade or to assist any other person to evade sales tax— (a) omits from a return any information in relation to any matter affecting the amount of sales tax chargeable by him or other person; Sales Tax (b) makes any false statement or entry in any return, claim or application; (c) gives any false answer, whether in writing or otherwise, to any question asked or request for information made under this Act; (d) prepares or maintains, or authorizes the preparation or maintenance of, any false book of accounts, false invoices or other false records, or falsifies or authorizes the falsification of any book of accounts, invoices or records; or (e) makes, uses or authorizes the use of any fraud, artifice or contrivance, commits an offence. (2) Any person who commits an offence under subsection (1) shall, on conviction, be liable— (a) for the first offence, to a fine of not less than ten times and not more than twenty times the amount of sales tax or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both; and (b) for a second or subsequent offence, to a fine of not less than twenty times and not more than forty times the amount of sales tax or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years or to both. (3) For the purposes of subsection (2), where the amount of sales tax cannot be ascertained, the person shall be liable to a fine of not less than fifty thousand ringgit and not more than five hundred thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years or to both. (4) Any person who assists in, or advises with respect to, the preparation of any return where the return results in an understatement of the liability for sales tax of another person, unless he satisfies the court that the assistance or advice was given with reasonable care, commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine of not less than two thousand ringgit and not more than twenty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both. 75 76 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (5) Any reference under paragraph (1)(e) in relation to a person who makes, uses or authorizes the use of any fraud, artifice or contrivance includes a reference to a person who, without the authority of the officer of sales tax— (a) destroys, damages, erases, alters or manipulates the data stored in, or used in connection with, a computer; (b) introduces into, or records or stores in, a computer by any means data for the purpose of— (i) destroying, damaging, erasing, altering or manipulating other data stored in that computer; or (ii) interfering with, interrupting or obstructing the lawful use of that computer, or the data stored in that computer; or (c) otherwise uses a computer, the purpose or effect of which is to evade sales tax. (6) For the purposes of subsection (5), “data” includes any computer programme or part of a computer programme. (7) In any prosecution under this section, any evasion of sales tax shall be deemed to be with the knowledge of the accused unless the contrary be proved by the accused. Giving incorrect information relating to liability to sales tax 87. Without prejudice to any other liability incurred under this Act, any person who gives any incorrect information in relation to any matter affecting his own liability to sales tax or the liability of any other person to sales tax commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to both. Sales Tax Improperly obtaining refund 88. Any person who causes or attempts to cause the refund by the Director General under section 10, 36 or 39 to himself or to any other person of any amount in excess of the amount properly so refundable to him or to that other person commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable— (a) to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both; and (b) to a penalty of two times the amount refunded in excess of the amount properly so refundable Employee may transact business 89. (1) An employee of any person may transact business generally with any proper officer of sales tax on behalf of such person. (2) A proper officer of sales tax may refuse to transact business with such employee unless the person referred to under subsection (1) identifies such employee to such proper officer of sales tax as empowered to transact. Transaction of business on behalf of taxable person 90. (1) Subject to section 89, no person shall transact any business in relation to this Act on behalf of any taxable person, except on matters with regard to any refund, remission, exemption, or any other matters as approved by the Director General, under this Act. (2) The person who transacts business on any of the matters stated in subsection (1) on behalf of a taxable person shall— (a) produce a letter of authorization from the taxable person whom he represents; and (b) where any prescribed form is required to be submitted for the purposes of the matters being transacted, submit 77 78 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 the form that has been signed by the taxable person, except where otherwise allowed by a senior officer of sales tax. (3) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence. Offences by authorized and unauthorized persons 91. Any person— (a) being an employee of a taxable person or a person authorized under section 90 who— (i) withholds for his own use or otherwise any portion of the amount of sales tax or penalties collected under this Act; (ii) otherwise than in good faith, demands from any person an amount in excess of any assessment of sales tax due and payable, or penalties payable, under this Act; (iii) submits any false return, statement or report, whether in writing or otherwise, of the amount of sales tax or penalty collected or received by him under this Act; or (iv) defrauds any person, embezzles any money, or otherwise uses his position so as to deal wrongfully either with the Director General or any other individual; or (b) not being authorized under this Act who collects or attempts to collect any sales tax or penalty under this Act, commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both Sales Tax Obstruction 92. Any person who in any way obstructs, assaults or hinders any proper officer of sales tax in the discharge of his functions under this Act commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand ringgit or to both. Offences by company, etc. 93. (1) Where any company, limited liability partnership, firm, society or other body of persons commits an offence under this Act, a person who at the time of the commission of the offence was a director, compliance officer, partner, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the company, limited liability partnership, firm, society or other body of persons or was purporting to act in the capacity or was in any manner or to any extent responsible for the management of any of the affairs of the company, limited liability partnership, firm, society or other body of persons or was assisting in its management— (a) may be charged severally or jointly in the same proceedings with the company, limited liability partnership, firm, society or the body of persons; and (b) if the company, limited liability partnership, firm, society or the body of persons is found guilty of the offence, shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence unless, having regard to the nature of his functions in that capacity and to all circumstances, he proves— (i) that the offence was committed without his knowledge; or (ii) that the offence was commited without his consent or connivance and that he had taken all reasonable precautions and exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of the offence. (2) Where any person would be liable under this Act to any punishment, penalty or forfeiture for any act, omission, neglect or default, he shall be liable to the same punishment, penalty or forfeiture for every such act, omission, neglect or default of the 79 80 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 person’s employee or agent, or of the employee of the person’s agent, if the act, omission, neglect or default was committed— (a) by that person’s employee in the course of his employment; (b) by that person’s agent when acting on behalf of that person; or (c) by the employee of that person’s agent when acting in the course of his employment by the person’s agent or otherwise on behalf of the person’s agent acting on behalf of that person General penalty 94. Any person who commits an offence under this Act for which no penalty is expressly provided shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding thirty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or to both. Compounding of offences 95. (1) The Minister may, with the approval of the Public Prosecutor, make regulations prescribing— (a) any offence under this Act or any regulations made under this Act as an offence which may be compounded; (b) the criteria for compounding such offence; and (c) the method and procedure for compounding such offence. (2) Any senior officer of sales tax may, with the consent in writing of the Public Prosecutor, at any time before a charge is being instituted, compound any offence prescribed as an offence which may be compounded by making a written offer to the person reasonably suspected of having committed the offence to compound the offence upon payment to the Director General of a sum of money not exceeding fifty per centum of the amount of the maximum fine to which the person would have been liable to if he had been convicted of the offence, within such time as may be specified in the written offer. Sales Tax (3) An offer under subsection (2) may be made at any time after the offence has been committed but before any prosecution for it has been instituted, and where the amount specified in the offer is not paid within the time specified in the offer, or such extended time as the Director General may grant, prosecution for the offence may be instituted at any time after that against the person to whom the offer was made. (4) Where an offence has been compounded under subsection (2), no prosecution shall be instituted in respect of the offence against the person to whom the offer to compound was made, and any document or thing seized in connection with the offence may be released by the Director General, subject to such terms as the Director General thinks fit. (5) All sums of moneys received by the Director General under this section shall be paid into and form part of the Consolidated Fund Review and appeal 96. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director General may apply to the Director General for review of any of his decision within thirty days from the date the person has been notified of such decision provided that no appeal has been made on the same decision to the Customs Appeal Tribunal or court. (2) An application for review under subsection (1) shall be made in the prescribed form. (3) Where an application for review has been made under subsection (1), the Director General shall make the review and notify the decision of the review to the person, where practicable, within sixty days from the date of the receipt of such application. (4) No review may be made in any matter relating to compound. (5) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director General under subsection (3) or any other provision of this Act, except any matter relating to compound, may appeal to the Customs Appeal Tribunal in writing within thirty days from the date of notification of the decision to the aggrieved person. 81 82 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 (6) Any sales tax due and payable under this Act shall be paid notwithstanding any review or appeal has been made under this section. Liquidator of company to give notice of winding up, and set aside sales tax 97. (1) Where a resolution is passed and becomes effective, or an order is made, for the winding up of a company which is a registered manufacturer or an importer, the liquidator of the company shall— (a) give notice of the winding up of the company to the Director General within fourteen days after the resolution is effective or order is made; (b) before disposing of any of the assets of the company, set aside such sum out of the assets as appears to the Director General to be sufficient to provide for any sales tax that is or will thereafter become due and payable in respect of the company; and (c) pay the sales tax referred to in paragraph (b). (2) A liquidator of any company referred to in subsection (1) who fails to give notice to the Director General within the time specified in paragraph (1)(a) or fails to provide for payment of the sales tax as required under paragraph (1)(c) shall be personally liable for any sales tax that is or will become due and payable as aforesaid. (3) Any liquidator who fails to comply with subsection (1) commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding ten thousand ringgit. (4) Where two or more persons are appointed as liquidators or are required by law to carry out the winding up of the company referred to in subsection (1), the obligations and liabilities attaching to a liquidator under this section shall attach to all such persons jointly and severally, subject to a right of contribution between themselves as in cases of contract Sales Tax Appointment of receiver to be notified to Director General 98. (1) Where a receiver of the property of a registered manufacturer or an importer is appointed, the receiver shall give notice of such appointment to the Director General within fourteen days thereafter, and shall before disposing of any of the assets of the registered manufacturer or importer set aside such sum out of the assets as appears to the Director General to be sufficient to provide for any sales tax that is or will thereafter become due and payable in respect of the taxable goods that have been sold or manufactured by the registered manufacturer or importer before the appointment of the receiver, and shall pay such sales tax. (2) Any receiver appointed under subsection (1) who fails to give notice to the Director General within the time specified in subsection (1) or fails to provide for the payment of the sales tax as required under that subsection shall be personally liable for any sales tax that is or will become due and payable as aforesaid. (3) Any receiver who fails to comply with subsection (1) commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding ten thousand ringgit. (4) Where two or more persons are appointed as receivers, the obligations and liabilities attaching to a receiver under this section shall attach to all such persons jointly and severally, subject to a right of contribution between themselves as in cases of contract. Registered manufacturer to submit audit certificate 99. The Director General may require a registered manufacturer to submit annually an audit certificate, signed by a public accountant not in the employment of the registered manufacturer, in relation to the records required to be kept by the registered manufacturer under section 24 in respect of the registered manufacturer’s production and sale of taxable goods manufactured by him. Sales tax, etc., to be payable notwithstanding any proceedings, etc. 100. The institution of proceedings or the imposition of a penalty, fine or term of imprisonment under this Act or the compounding 83 84 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 of an offence under section 95 shall not relieve any person from the liability to pay for sales tax, surcharge, penalty, fees or other money under this Act. Service of notices, etc. 101. (1) Every notice, direction or other document required by this Act to be served on any person may be served— (a) personally on that person; (b) by sending it to that person by registered post; or (c) by the electronic service under section 102. (2) The notice, direction or other document sent by registered post to a person shall be deemed to have been served on that person at the time at which it would have been delivered to that person in the ordinary course of the post if such notice, direction or other document was addressed— (a) in the case of a company, limited liability partnership, firm, society or other body of persons— (i) to its registered office; (ii) to its last known address; or (iii) to any person authorized by it to accept service of process; and (b) in the case of an individual, to his last known address. (3) Where a person has given his consent for a notice to be served on him through the electronic service, the notice shall be deemed to have been served at the time when the electronic notice is transmitted to his account through the electronic service. Sales Tax Use of electronic service 102. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act and subject to the regulations made under this Act, the Director General may provide an electronic service to any registered user for— (a) the filing or furnishing of any application, return, declaration or any other document; and (b) the service of any notice, direction, order, permit, receipt or any other document. (2) Where an electronic notice is made and transmitted to the Director General, the Director General shall not be liable for any loss or damage suffered by the registered user by reason of any error or omission of whatever nature or howsoever arising appearing in any electronic notice obtained by the registered user under the electronic service if the error or omission was made in good faith and in the ordinary course of the discharge of the duties of the Director General or occurred or arose as a result of any defect or breakdown in the electronic service or in the equipment used for the provision of the electronic service. (3) Any electronic notice made and transmitted by the registered user shall be deemed to have been filed, furnished or served at the time the electronic notice is received by the Director General. (4) For the purposes of this section, “registered user” means any person who is authorized in writing by the Director General to gain access to and use the electronic service Protection of officer of sales tax from liability 103. No officer of sales tax or other person employed by the Government in the course of carrying out his duties under this Act shall be liable to make good any loss sustained in respect of any goods by fire, theft, damage or other causes while the goods are in the customs control or excise control or in the lawful custody or control of the officer of sales tax or other person employed by the Government in the course of carrying out his duties under this Act unless the loss is caused by his wilful neglect or default. 85 86 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 Rewards 104. The Director General may order such rewards as he may deem fit to be paid to any officer of sales tax or other person for services rendered in connection with the detection of any offences against this Act. Power of Director General to charge fees 105. The Director General may charge such fee as he may consider reasonable in respect of any services rendered by him or any officer of sales tax— (a) which is not required to be rendered under this Act; and (b) for which no fee is prescribed by any written law. Power to make regulations 106. (1) The Minister may make regulations as may be necessary or expedient for the purposes of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), the Minister may prescribe— (a) all matters relating to registration of manufacturers; (b) all matters relating to taxable period; (c) all matters relating to determination of sale value of taxable goods; (d) all matters relating to furnishing of returns and payment of sales tax; (e) all matters relating to refund, drawback and remission of sales tax; (f) all matters relating to public ruling and customs ruling; (g) all matters relating to electronic service; (h) all matters relating to invoices, credit notes and debit notes; Sales Tax 87 (i) all matters relating to the offices for the administration of sales tax; (j) all fees required by this Act to be prescribed; (k) all forms to be prescribed for the purposes of this Act; (l) all matters relating to petroleum; or (m) any other matters required by this Act to be prescribed. (3) Any regulations made under subsection (1) may prescribe an act or ommission in contravention of the regulations to be an offence and may prescribe penalties of a fine not exceeding thirty thousand ringgit or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or to both for such offence PART XIII SAVINGS AND TRANSITIONAL Registration on commencement date 107. (1) Notwithstanding section 13, any person who manufactures goods before the effective date which goods are taxable goods on the effective date shall, within thirty days from the date of the coming into operation of this Act, apply to the Director General to be registered as a registered manufacturer if there are reasonable grounds for believing that the total sale value of all his taxable goods in the month of effective date and eleven months immediately succeeding that month will exceed the total sale value of taxable goods determined under subsection 12(1). (2) The Director General shall register the person referred to in subsection (1) with effect from the first day of the month following the month in which the application is made, and the person shall charge sales tax on the taxable goods sold, used or disposed of by him with effect from such day. (3) Any person who manufactures goods before the effective date which goods are taxable goods on the effective date and has made an application before the effective date to the 88 Laws of Malaysia ACT 806 Director General to be registered as a registered manufacturer under this Act— (a) shall be deemed to have been registered in accordance with section 13 on the effective date if there are reasonable grounds for believing that the total sale value of all his taxable goods in the month of the effective date and eleven months immediately succeeding that month will exceed the total sale value of taxable goods determined under subsection 12(1); and (b) shall charge sales tax on the taxable goods sold, used or disposed of by the person with effect from the effective date. (4) A manufacturer who is registered under the Goods and Services Tax Act 2014 [Act 762] before the effective date and manufactures taxable goods on the effective date— (a) shall be deemed to have been registered in accordance with section 13 on the effective date if there are reasonable grounds for believing that the total sale value of all his taxable goods in the month of the effective date and eleven months immediately succeeding that month will exceed the total sale value of taxable goods determined under subsection 12(1); and (b) shall charge sales tax on the taxable goods sold, used or disposed of by the manufacturer with effect from the effective date Progressive or periodic agreement 108. (1) Where any sale of taxable goods is made under an agreement for a period or progressively over a period whether or not at regular intervals and that period begins before 1 June 2018 and ends after the effective date, the proportion of the sale which is attributed to the part of the period after the effective date shall be chargeable to sales tax. (2) Where the sale referred to in subsection (1) is made under a warranty whether expressed, implied or required by law and the value of the warranty is included in the price of the goods, Sales Tax 89 no sales tax shall be charged on the replacement of the goods under such warranty. (3) Subsection (1) shall not apply to a sale of goods where goods and services tax under the Goods and Services Tax Act 2014 has been paid on the sale of the goods to the extent covered by the invoice. Things done in anticipation of the enactment of this Act 109. All acts and things done by or on behalf of the Director General in preparation for or in anticipation of the enactment of this Act and any expenditure incurred in relation thereto shall be deemed to have been authorized under this Act, provided that the acts and things done are consistent with the general intention and purposes of this Act, and all rights and obligations acquired or incurred as a result of the doing of those acts or things including any expenditure incurred in relation thereto shall upon the coming into operation of this Act be deemed to be the rights and obligations of the Director General. Hakcipta Pencetak H PERCETAKAN NASIONAL MALAYSIA BERHAD Semua Hak Terpelihara. Tiada mana mana bahagian jua daripada penerbitan ini boleh diterbitkan semula atau disimpan di dalam bentuk yang boleh diperolehi semula atau disiarkan dalam sebarang bentuk dengan apa jua cara elektronik, mekanikal, fotokopi, rakaman dan/ atau sebaliknya tanpa mendapat izin daripada Percetakan Nasional Malaysia Berhad (Pencetak kepada Kerajaan Malaysia yang dilantik). PNMB DICETAK OLEH PERCETAKAN NASIONAL MALAYSIA BERHAD, KUALA LUMPUR BAGI PIHAK DAN DENGAN PERINTAH KERAJAAN MALAYSIA WJW011461 28 08 2018 ivi Canada Bel 2ubiggetey securte nique National Cyber Security Strategy Canada’s Vision for Security and Prosperity in the Digital Age © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 2018 Cat. No.: PS4 239/2018E ISBN: 978 0 660 26553 7 Table of Contents Executive SummaryCanada’s Place in a Digital World The Importance of Cyber Security The Vision of the National Cyber Security Strategy: Security and prosperity in the digital age Scope of the Strategy Implementing the Strategy IntroductionBuilding on Canada’s Accomplishments in a Dynamic Cyber Landscape Security and Resilience Strategic Context: The Evolution of the Cyber Threat Cybercrime and Advanced Cyber Threats The Growing Impact Public Consultation on Cyber Security Secure and Resilient Canadian Systems Cyber Innovation Strategic Context: Expanding Frontiers of Cyber Security New Horizons of Technology and Business Development Building on the Benefits of Digital Technology Advancing 21st Century Skills and Knowledge Public Consultation on Cyber Security An Innovative and Adaptive Cyber Ecosystem Leadership and CollaborationStrategic Context: Collaborating to Realize the Benefits of Digital Life Raising Baseline Cyber Security in Canada Federal Cyber Security Leadership in a Dynamic Environment Public Consultation on Cyber Security Effective Leadership, Governance, and Collaboration i of iii NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Foreword Virtually everything Canadians do is touched by technology in some way on a per capita basis, we spend the most time online of any country in the world, at 43.5 hours per Canadian per month. We are heavily inter connected and networked, a fact that enhances our quality of life, but also creates vulnerabilities. From commercial supply chains to the critical infrastructure that underpins our economy and our society, the risks in the cyber world have multiplied, accelerated, and grown increasingly malicious. Major corporations, industries and our international allies and partners are engaged in the global cyber challenge. But many others are not — representing a significant risk, but also a missed opportunity in this rapidly growing global industry. While it is important to be keenly aware of cyber threats, Canada’s cyber security policy cannot be driven by fear and defensiveness. With this in mind, the renewal of the existing Cyber Security Strategy has been undertaken with an emphasis on the enormous potential of Canada’s increased leadership in this field. In partnership with the Ministers of Defence, Innovation, Infrastructure, Public Services and the Treasury Board, we consulted directly with Canadians and key stakeholders about how the new strategy could best serve their security needs, while allowing them to benefit from the opportunities that the digital economy offers. Informed by over 2,000 submissions to our public consultation, the Strategy directly addresses the gaps and areas for improvement in Canada’s current cyber security climate. The Strategy’s core goals are reflected in Budget 2018’s substantial investments in cyber security totaling more than $500 million dollars over five years. As the largest single investment in cyber security ever made by the Canadian government, Budget 2018 demonstrates our commitment to safety and security in the digital age. ii of iii • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY THE HONOURABLE RALPH GOODALE Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada Among the new measures introduced: • Funding for the new Canadian Centre for Cyber Security to support leadership and collaboration between different levels of government and international partners, while providing a clear and trusted resource for Canadian citizens and businesses. • The creation of the National Cybercrime Coordination Unit to expand the RCMP’s capacity to investigate cybercrime, establishing a coordination hub for both domestic and international partners. • Funding to foster innovation and economic growth, and the development of Canadian cyber talent. The Strategy is the roadmap for Canada’s path forward on cyber security, and is designed to meet the objectives and priorities of Canadians. We are proud to be leading the way. iii of iii • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Executive Summary Canada’s Place in a Digital World Our world has been transformed by digital innovation. Digital technologies are now an integral part of our daily lives, with new developments emerging every day. From running our businesses, accessing government services, to interacting with our friends and families, these technologies connect Canadians from coast to coast to coast while linking us into a dynamic global network. Digital technologies are now an integral part of our daily lives, with new This is just the beginning. There is endless potential for new and revolutionary ideas. We will continue to see digital innovation pushed to new heights — to the benefit of our communities, our societies, and our planet. 1 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Executive Summary The Importance of Cyber Security As we embrace digital technologies for their tremendous benefits, we can open ourselves up to threats. Criminals and other malicious cyber threat actors — many of which operate outside our borders — take advantage of security gaps, low cyber security awareness, and technological developments in an effort to compromise cyber systems. They steal personal and financial information, intellectual property, and trade secrets. They disrupt and sometimes destroy the infrastructure that we rely on for essential services and our way of life. In 2010, the Government of Canada launched a national effort to defend against these threats with Canada’s first Cyber Security Strategy. The progress made and accomplishments achieved under the 2010 Strategy are the basis for future action. Our new approach reflects the extent to which digital technologies have become essential to our way of life. With a new Cyber Security Strategy, we can proceed with confidence in our digital age. In this reality, cyber security is the companion to innovation and the protector of prosperity. The Vision of the National Cyber Security Strategy: Security and prosperity in the digital age Strong cyber security is an essential element of Canadian innovation and prosperity. Individuals, governments, and businesses all want to have confidence in the cyber systems that underpin their daily lives. The Government of Canada envisions a future in which all Canadians play an active role in shaping and sustaining our nation’s cyber resilience. 2 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY ¢ Executive Summary To realize our vision, the Government of Canada and its partners will work together across three themes: Security and Resilience Through collaborative action with partners and enhanced cyber security capabilities, we will better protect Canadians from cybercrime, respond to evolving threats, and defend critical government and private sector systems Cyber innovation By supporting advanced research, fostering digital innovation, and developing cyber skills and knowledge, the federal government will position Canada as a global leader in cyber security. Leadership and Collaboration The federal government, in close collaboration with provinces, territories, and the private sector, will take a leadership role to advance cyber security in Canada and will, in coordination with allies, work to shape the international cyber security environment in Canada’s favour. 3 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY ¢ Executive Summary In a dynamic cyber security environment, the Government of Canada’s approach will be rooted in a sustained commitment to: • Protect the safety and security of Canadians and our critical infrastructure • Promote and protect rights and freedoms online Encourage cyber security for business, economic growth, and prosperity • Collaborate and support coordination across jurisdictions and sectors to strengthen Canada’s cyber resilience Proactively adapt to changes in the cyber security landscape and the emergence of new technology Scope of the Strategy The scope of this Strategy starts with the work that the Government of Canada is already undertaking. This includes ongoing and future efforts to protect Government of Canada systems, to extend our network of partnerships to help protect critical infrastructure, and to help Canadians to be safe online. In a more diverse and dynamic global cyber security landscape, however, Canada’s new approach will be more extensive and inclusive. This document outlines the key elements of the global cyber security environment and articulates some of the ways that the Government of Canada will respond to an array of new challenges and opportunities in cyberspace. 4 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY ¢ Executive Summary Implementing the Strategy Recognizing that the pace of change we see today will only accelerate, this Strategy is designed as the mainstay of the Government’s continuous efforts to enhance cyber security in Canada. The Government’s actions will evolve alongside the ground breaking technological developments and resulting paradigm shifts that have become common in our connected world. Cyber security action plans will supplement this Strategy. These will detail the specific initiatives that the federal government will undertake over time, with clear performance metrics and a commitment to report on results achieved. They will also outline the Government’s plan for working with internal and external partners to achieve its vision. The implementation of this Strategy will align with other cyber related Government of Canada initiatives. These include: the Minister of Democratic Institutions’ mandate to defend the electoral process from cyber threats; cyber foreign policy in Canada’s international agenda; the Canadian military’s use of cyber; and the Innovation and Skills Plan. 5 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY ¢ Canada’s Cyber Security Strategy 2010 The Government of Canada’s first Cyber Security Strategy allocated $431.5 million over ten years, with three pillars of action and wide ranging accomplishments I. Securing Government systems The Government of Canada increased its capacity to prevent, detect, respond to, and recover from cyber attacks. The number of data breaches has steadily declined since 2010 — despite an increase in the number and sophistication of state sponsored and non state cyber activities against Government networks. II. Partnering to secure vital cyber systems outside the federal government Partnerships were forged with owners and operators of Canada’s critical infrastructure, the private sector, and provincial and territorial governments. The Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre (CCIRC) expanded its operations, with over 1300 organizations receiving regular alerts and communications. III. Helping Canadians to be secure online Through the Get Cyber Safe campaign, the Government of Canada supported cyber security awareness with outreach, activities, and development of targeted resources. Efforts made under the 2010 Strategy also improved the capacity of the RCMP and law enforcement agencies to combat cybercrime, including initial investments in cybercrime intelligence, investigations, and training. 6 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Introduction Building on Canada’s Accomplishments in a Dynamic Cyber Landscape What is Cyber Security? Cyber security is the protection of digital information and the infrastructure on which it resides. Cyber security was once the domain of technical experts, but now, in our digital world, we all have a role to play in our individual and collective cyber security. From the Margins to the Mainstream The degree to which digital technology is now integrated into our daily lives would have been unimaginable just a few years ago. From social media, smartphone applications, online shopping, networked devices, the cloud, and beyond, we rely on digital technologies for more than personal enjoyment — they are integral to the systems that underpin our economy and our way of life. These interdependent systems include the 7 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Introduction communications networks that connect across the country and around the world, energy to heat our homes and power our industry, and air, train, and road travel we use every day. We tend to take this connectivity for granted, without pausing to reflect on its implications. Cyber security cannot be taken for granted. As the benefits and opportunities of technologies continue to grow, it is increasingly crucial to secure these technologies Taking Stock of a Changing Landscape CYBER SECURITY SNAPSHOT: THE BENEFITS OF BACKING UP In 2016, the Government of Canada took the first step toward developing a new Cyber Security Strategy. The Cyber Review was launched to understand the cyber security implications of being a connected nation, and to position the Government of Canada to establish a new approach that Jacqueline is a small business owner who sells crafts through an online store. One day, Jacqueline receives an email from a customer who is complaining about a broken piece. The customer attaches a picture of the product, but when Jacqueline opens the attachment she finds that she is locked out of her computer. A message appears indicating that her computer will only be unlocked if she pays a ransom of $1,000 to the perpetrator. Fortunately, Jacqueline regularly backs up her computer. She wipes her hard drive, eliminating the malware that was delivered through the email attachment and restores the backup, which allows her to access all reflects the challenges and opportunities we face. The Cyber Review sought to take stock of the evolving threats in cyberspace, to understand and explore the ways that cyber security is becoming a driver of economic prosperity, and to determine the appropriate federal role in this digital age. The Cyber Review included in depth engagement within the federal government cyber security community, an evaluation of our performance under the 2010 Strategy, as well as Canada’s first public consultation on cyber security. The Government of Canada obtained insights and advice from experts, key her documents. stakeholders, and engaged citizens. 8 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Introduction CYBER SECURITY SNAPSHOT: PASSWORD SMARTS Our Response This new Cyber Security Strategy reflects the perspectives from the Cyber Review. It also recognizes that while cyber threats are growing in sophistication and magnitude, there is enormous potential for Canadian digital innovation and expertise in cyber security. It is designed to be adaptable and to account for a continuously changing cyber landscape. Christine loves the convenience of the cloud. She created one central account online that manages everything from her computer, her smartphone, her fitness tracker, and even her home security system. Through the cloud, her email and social media accounts are linked, her photos and videos are uploaded automatically, and any updates to her calendar appear across all her devices. Christine always uses the same password so that it’s easy for her to remember. When she hears about a data breach affecting her email account, she realizes that someone could use her email password to access her cloud account. Concerned about protecting her privacy and her information, Christine creates a new, strong password, which she Our National Cyber Security Strategy establishes three goals in response to evolving threats, emerging opportunities, and the need for collaborative action: • Secure and Resilient Canadian Systems An Innovative and Adaptive Cyber Ecosystem • Effective Leadership and Collaboration The federal government will lead the effort to achieve these goals in an era when cyber security is not just a necessity, but a competitive advantage for Canada. varies slightly for other online services. 9 of 35 NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY About the Cyber Security Review The input received through the Cyber Review was comprehensive, sophisticated, and insightful. Responses came from the federal government cyber community, cyber security experts, business leaders, government officials, law enforcement, academics, and engaged citizens. The Cyber Review revealed three main trends: There is support for law enforcement’s efforts to address cybercrime while protecting privacy in cyberspace • There is recognition that cyber security serves to protect personal information — and by extension, privacy. Canadians support efforts to safeguard their privacy online. • Canadians acknowledge that law enforcement faces challenges addressing cybercrime, and are concerned by the rising threat of cybercrime for individuals, private and public sector organizations, and governments. There is a wide ranging need for improved cyber security knowledge and skills Better cyber security knowledge and skills are needed. This extends from our children to our elderly and from our small and medium business owners to our law enforcement agencies and corporate executives. • A shortage of cyber security talent makes it difficult for organizations — including the federal government — to attract and retain the people they need to improve their cyber security or to disrupt cyber threats. 10 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY About the Cyber Security Review There are calls for strong federal leadership on cyber security: • External partners want a reliable focal point of federal government leadership on cyber security. Partners want consistent messaging, advice, guidance from the Government of Canada. • Organizations have asked for cyber security standards or legislation in Canada to clarify requirements and expectations to improve their cyber security. Stakeholders want to see federal leadership in cyber security to foster national collaboration, drive investment, facilitate information sharing and safeguard rights and freedoms. 11 of 35 NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Security and Resilience Strategic Context: The Evolution of the Cyber Threat The threats we face in cyberspace are complex and rapidly evolving. Governments, businesses, organizations, and Canadians are vulnerable. With more of our economy and essential services moving online every year, the stakes could not be higher Cybercrime and Advanced Cyber Threats Perpetrators of malicious cyber activity are extremely diverse, with varying aims and a wide array of techniques. Malicious cyber actors include individual hackers and insider threats, criminal networks, nation states, terrorist organizations, and state sponsored actors. Sophisticated cyber attacks are often technically challenging to understand, with significant expertise required to do so. 12 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Security and Resilience Any organization or individual can be a victim of malicious cyber activity. Victims may be individually targeted or part of a campaign affecting millions of internet users. As Canadians put more information online, they become increasingly attractive targets for malicious cyber actors. Canadian law enforcement agencies’ ability to protect Canadians from these actors, who may be anywhere in the world, is a growing challenge. Malicious cyber activity is often conducted for monetary gain. For example, phishing emails that appear to come from financial institutions can deceive people into providing their banking information. Ransomware can be deployed to encrypt files on a device or system, with a hacker demanding payment to restore access. Data breaches can result in personal and financial information (such as social insurance numbers, credit card information) being stolen from organizations’ online databases and subsequently sold in criminal marketplaces for activities like fraud, identity theft, or extortion. Malicious cyber actors can also be motivated by a specific cause — sometimes called “hacktivists” — such as exposing wrongdoing, protesting, or provoking embarrassment. They can also be enthusiasts, attempting to demonstrate their skill at hacking and to gain notoriety. On a larger scale, nation states and state sponsored actors have the capability to steal our intellectual property or confidential business strategies to give their own economies a competitive advantage. Some nation states are also developing advanced cyber tools with hostile aims. There are risks to Canada’s national security and public safety if 13 of 35 NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Security and Resilience the threat is to the computer systems that underpin government systems, critical infrastructure, and democratic institutions. Terrorist organizations are also interested in acquiring advanced cyber tools to conduct attacks The Growing Impact As malicious cyber tools become increasingly accessible and as rates of cybercrime continue to rise, there is a real threat to Canada’s economic well being. Furthermore, as more of Canada’s critical infrastructure can be controlled remotely and essential services are managed online, cyber incidents have the potential to compromise national security and CYBER SECURITY SNAPSHOT: EMAIL SCAMS It’s tax season and Mohsen recently filed his taxes online. A few days later, he receives an email from someone claiming to be a tax official, informing him that there is information missing from his file. The official makes an urgent request for additional personal information to complete his file, including his address and social insurance number. The email notes that failure to provide this information could lead to steep penalties and even jail time. Mohsen feels suspicious about the email, and so before providing the information, he checks the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) website. He reads that the CRA would never send emails asking individuals to divulge personal or financial information. He follows the CRA’s public safety. From a financial perspective, victims of cyber compromise face immediate costs to recover and restore their systems. They also face long term costs to replace or upgrade cyber systems, as well as untold reputational costs. While start ups are particularly vulnerable, the loss of intellectual property has contributed to financial ruin for businesses of all sizes. Cyber incidents can also be profoundly destabilizing. They can erode trust in e commerce and government institutions and can lead people to question their continued use of digital technologies if they feel that their safety or privacy is at risk. The internet of things (IoT) refers to objects and devices that are connected to the internet to communicate with one another and provide advice by ignoring the email. 14 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Security and Resilience more efficient and customized services. The IoT is growing rapidly, with over 25 billion connected devices expected by 2020. Connecting devices to the internet opens the door to new cyber security risks. Cyber security gaps can be exploited to disrupt services through distributed denial of service (DDoS) campaigns or to gain entry to wider systems or private data. In October 2016, millions of unsecured devices were used to overwhelm the servers of Dyn, an internet infrastructure company, which then took popular websites and online services offline internationally. CYBER SECURITY SNAPSHOT: RESILIENCE THROUGH INFORMATION SHARING Beom Jun works in the IT Department for a large financial institution. He has noticed that there have been a lot of attempts to hack into the system. While they have been unsuccessful, he decides to send the technical information to the Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre (CCIRC) for their analysis. He knows that CCIRC relies on critical infrastructure organizations, like his bank, to report cyber incidents so that they can notify other sectors and international partners of trends and threats. He appreciates that by working together, they are increasing the cyber security of the organizations that As digital innovation is pushed further and as new technologies are developed, the nature of cyber threats will constantly change. For instance, internet connected technologies are increasingly popular, from thermostats and healthcare devices like pacemakers to cars and the systems that run our critical infrastructure and services. Without adequate cyber security, connected devices are vulnerable to being hacked on an unprecedented scale. Similarly, many Canadians rely on encryption to secure their online communications and data. The arrival of quantum computing will undercut the security of traditional encryption, requiring that Canadians have quantum resistant solutions at their disposal. A forward looking and flexible cyber security posture will be necessary to keep pace with these changes. Canadians rely on. 15 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY About the Cyber Security Review Public Consultation on Cyber Security What We Heard “The #1 cyber challenge for Canada is that there are an increasing number of incidents that are causing harm to the economy and society, ranging from breaches, crimes, disruption of essential services, and destruction of corporate and country assets” “Privacy and security are not a zero sum game and we can have both. There is no security without privacy. And liberty requires both security and privacy” “Canadian law enforcement should centralize their cybercrime resources… A single window centre will make it easier for businesses to know who to call when their systems have been compromised, and will help law enforcement investigate and respond to cybercrime across jurisdictions” 16 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Security Strategy Goals Secure and Resilient Canadian Systems Through collaborative action with partners and enhanced cyber security capabilities, we will better protect Canadians from cybercrime, respond to evolving threats, and defend critical government and private sector systems. The Government of Canada will maintain and improve cyber security across all federal departments and agencies to protect the privacy of Canadians’ information held by the federal government and the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of critical services for Canadians. The Government of Canada will enhance law enforcement capacity to respond to cybercrime. It will support coordination across law enforcement agencies and with federal, provincial, territorial, and international partners. The Government will enhance cybercrime investigative capacity and make it easier for Canadians to report cybercrime. Small and medium organizations often lack the knowledge and resources to implement cyber security regimes, even if doing so would offer a competitive advantage. The Government of Canada will help support these organizations — making cyber security more accessible. In response to cyber threats of increasing sophistication, the Government of Canada will consider how its advanced cyber capabilities could be applied to defend critical networks in Canada and deter foreign cyber threat actors. 17 of 35 NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Security Strategy Goals Some cyber systems — such as electricity grids, communications networks, or financial institutions — are so important that any disruption could have serious consequences for public safety and national security. The federal government will work with provinces, territories, and the private sector to help define requirements to protect this digital infrastructure. 18 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Innovation Strategic Context: Expanding Frontiers of Cyber Security Digital innovation has become the engine of economic growth in the 21st century. Cyber security is not only essential for protecting the sources of Canada’s digital innovation — it has become a source of innovation in its CYBER SECURITY SNAPSHOT: SKILLS FOR THE DIGITAL AGE Marc is looking for possible summer camps for his daughters. He wants to find something that allows them to try something different while developing new skills. In his search, he comes across a summer program designed to help children develop basic coding skills, which would give them the tools they need to build websites and develop their own programs. With Marc’s encouragement they register for the camp, opening the door to a new hobby and an exciting skillset. own right. New Horizons of Technology and Business Development Cyber security is increasingly driving innovation and economic activity in Canada. It already contributes $1.7 billion to Canada’s GDP and consists of over 11,000 well paying jobs.1 With the global cyber security industry forecasted to grow by 66% by 2021, thousands of additional jobs could 1 International Data Corporation (IDC) Canada , “2016 Canadian ICT Predictions and Forecast: Digital Transformation and Disruption,” December 2015 Information and Communications Technology Council (ICTC), “Critical Infrastructure in a Hyperconnected Economy,” August 2016. 19 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Innovation be created for Canadians in the years ahead.2 Governments, academia, and members of the private sector can work together to create new opportunities, drive investment, and foster leading edge research and development. Canada is already a leader in cyber security research and development. Breakthroughs in cyber security research are not only beneficial for Canadian cyber security firms, but for the economy as a whole. Government has a role to play to support advanced research and to help innovative companies scale up to bring cyber security technologies and services to the global marketplace. CYBER SECURITY SNAPSHOT: STREAMLINING SERVICE DELIVERY Stuart was relieved when he found out that he could access his Canada Pension Plan (CPP) account online without having to remember another password. All he has to do is go to the CPP log in page, click on the logo for his bank, and enter his information. He uses the same username and password as he does for his online banking, since his bank is a sign in partner for the Government of Canada’s online services. He really likes the convenience, and since he trusts his bank’s security measures, he knows his information is protected. As his son David keeps telling him, his banking information will be safer as long as he uses a secure Wi Fi — like his password protected network at home. Apparently, hackers can intercept traffic over unsecured Wi Fi, like in a coffee shop Building on the Benefits of Digital Technology Canada’s participation in digital life has generated immense prosperity and benefits, and has opened a new gateway to the world. Governments, businesses and other organizations play a central role in protecting these benefits by establishing strong security for their online platforms, products, and services. Cyber security is only as strong as its weakest link. Small and medium enterprises — and indeed many organizations in Canada — face similar challenges securing their systems and networks as their much larger counterparts, but must do so with less expertise and fewer resources. Governments can help correct this asymmetry by providing advice and guidance and enhancing access to cyber security information and tools or airport. 2 Research and Markets, “Cyber Security Market Global Forecast to 2021,” August 2016. 20 of 35 NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY ee Cyber Innovation This helps Canadian organizations in both public and private sectors to successfully adopt digital technologies. Individual knowledge goes a long way in cyber security, from digital literacy all the way to coding and threat mitigation skills. Initiatives in Canadian communities, schools, and post secondary institutions help to equip Canadians with skills for the digital age. The Government of Canada is playing its part through long term investments to help Canadians of all backgrounds to get the education and work experience they need to participate in an increasingly digital economy. Quantum science and technology allows information to be processed and secured much more rapidly and more securely. Quantum devices could have revolutionary benefits across a range of fields, such as helping to understand how diseases develop or optimizing medical treatments. While quantum can secure information and push technology to new limits, its use may also threaten many forms of encryption used today to protect systems and applications in Canada and around the world. Recognizing the opportunities and challenges of quantum computing, Canadian efforts have established a strong base of expertise and leadership in quantum computing, like that seen at the Institute of Quantum Computing at the University of Waterloo. 21 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Innovation Advancing 21st Century Skills and Knowledge The demand for qualified cyber security professionals is surging. A global shortage of qualified professionals represents an immediate and growing opportunity for Canada’s highly educated workforce. We can encourage more students to move into science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. We can encourage graduates from both STEM programs and other disciplines (such as psychology, sociology, or management) to specialize in the skills needed for cyber security jobs. Attracting this multidisciplinary talent, both domestically and from abroad, is essential for Canadian governments and businesses. It also helps to ensure that Canadian companies are able to safely grow and innovate as they expand their use of digital technology. As the cyber security environment continues to evolve, there is a constant need for reliable and up to date information. Canadian statistics and research in the area of cyber security will provide a more accurate view of the cyber issues our nation faces in a global context. This information can be used by academics, researchers, and policy makers to understand trends, manage risk, inform future investments, and adjust course when appropriate. 22 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY oe ee About the Cyber Security Review Public Consultation on Cyber Security What We Heard “We must work to ensure that start ups and innovation born in Canada stay in Canada” “The federal government can play a unique role in ensuring businesses see Canada as a location where they can thrive in a cyber safe environment” “Few appreciate the strategic relevance of cyber security intelligence. You can’t manage what you don’t measure” 23 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Security Strategy Goals An Innovative and Adaptive Cyber Ecosystem By supporting advanced research, fostering digital innovation, and developing cyber skills and knowledge, the federal government will position Canada as a global leader in cyber security. The Government of Canada will work with partners to drive investment and foster cyber research and development. The Government will focus on emerging areas of Canadian excellence, such as quantum computing and blockchain technologies. The federal government is already making progress in this regard, with Budget 2017 announcing the creation of a Pan Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy for research and talent. Together, we will explore initiatives to ensure that Canadian companies can bring their products to a global market. The Government will explore initiatives to drive domestic demand for cyber security technologies and services. The Government of Canada will explore new ideas for making businesses and Canadians of all ages and backgrounds more cyber secure. The federal government has already committed investments to improve digital skills, such as coding education for kids. Working together across governments, academia, and the private sector is necessary to address the cyber skills gap. Taking action now will allow us to build the labour force of the future, one that will help to support Canadian cyber security and that will contribute to Canada’s future prosperity. 24 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Security Strategy Goals The quality of information at our disposal shapes our ability to understand cyber trends. The federal government will support Canadian research and statistics efforts to improve our collective understanding of cyber threats and opportunities. 25 of 35 NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Leadership and Collaboration Strategic Context: Collaborating to Realize the Benefits of Digital Life Advances in technology benefit our communities and our societies. They contribute to our quality of life today, and will be instrumental in meeting the challenges of tomorrow. We all have a responsibility to secure these technologies. Through our National Cyber Security Strategy, the Government of Canada will advance the ways in which we work together to do so. Raising Baseline Cyber Security in Canada The vast majority of Canada’s digital systems are owned by individuals and organizations outside of the federal government. From individuals that use few technologies to tech savvy businesses that are firmly rooted in the online world, many do not realize that they could be the target of cyber threats. As a result, they do not have measures in place to protect 26 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Leadership and Collaboration themselves and recover from cyber incidents. Even those that recognize the importance of securing their information may find it hard to identify affordable and effective measures to protect themselves. The Government of Canada is taking on a leadership role in cyber security to help organizations and Canadians recognize the value of cyber security and to support efforts to raise the baseline of cyber security in Canada. It will complement these domestic efforts by working with international partners and allies, seeking to reduce the threat to Canada from cybercriminals and also from state actors and their proxies that may seek to harm us. Moreover, the federal government is aiming for national cyber security excellence. Reaching this target will involve enhancing and growing cyber security capabilities in government and industry. It will entail supporting Canada’s leading edge research and development, as well as the range of organizations and businesses that do not have strong cyber security measures in place. Private sector leaders will have a central role to play, as a collaborative effort is needed to ensure that all Canadians are as equipped as possible to prevent and respond to cyber threats. Blockchain technology allows for the creation of online ledgers or records. Often associated with virtual currencies, there are many possible applications of blockchain. It could be used to provide public services like issuing passports, creating records of contracts or legal documents, and processing payments for services rendered. The technology improves efficiency by reducing processing time for activities and reduces the risk of fraud and compromise, as no one party can modify, delete or append any records. 27 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Leadership and Collaboration The Government of Canada recognizes the potential of blockchain for secure service delivery and for wider economic and societal benefits. Ensuring the smart application of blockchain technologies in Canada will require a collaborative approach and a collective effort Federal Cyber Security Leadership in a Dynamic Environment The Government of Canada is in a unique position to play a leadership role in cyber security. This stems from extensive relationships with private and public sectors, a history of working with provinces, territories, and international officials on a range of cyber security issues, and advanced cyber security expertise and capabilities. Federal leadership in cyber security was established through the 2010 Strategy and the nation wide initiatives it introduced. In today’s cyber security environment, however, the federal government must deepen collaboration with partners to strengthen Canada’s cyber security. Concerted and integrated action by all parties is needed to build cyber resilience in Canada. Establishing a clear focal point for cyber security within the federal government is one of the ways that the Government will demonstrate leadership while also enhancing its capacity to collaborate with partners. The Government will ensure that partners receive unified advice and guidance on cyber security and that they know where to go for assistance. 28 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Leadership and Collaboration Smart cities use digital technologies to enhance quality of life by making services more efficient, cost effective, and responsive for urban residents. For example, “smart” traffic lights will measure and adapt timing to improve traffic flows and connected sewer systems will detect leaks and monitor real time water flow. CYBER SECURITY SNAPSHOT: COLLABORATING TO SOLVE CYBER SECURITY PROBLEMS To accelerate the development of smart cities in Canada, the federal government announced the Smart Cities Challenge initiative in Augustine received an invitation to participate in the Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre’s (CCIRC) annual Geek Week. He attended last year and enjoyed working with cyber professionals and academics from Canada and other countries to solve cyber security problems. Augustine found that the skills and professional connections he gained during Geek Week benefitted him when he returned to work. At last year’s event, his team experimented with CCIRC’s prototype tools to perform automated analysis of mobile based malware and ransomware, and also examined how encryption on such devices can be exploited by attackers. He likes that the work they did can have a real world benefit and that after the event the team was able to take the tool they worked on back to their own Budget 2017. The federal government will make smart investments in cyber security, while also advocating for its partners in the private sector and in other jurisdictions to do the same. Private sector organizations in Canada have world class cyber security capabilities that can be leveraged to benefit all sectors of the Canadian economy. There are also great ideas and strong leadership in our schools and our post secondary institutions that will be instrumental in shaping the future of cyber security in Canada. The Government will work to bridge Canada wide efforts to develop cyber skills, advance new solutions, and strengthen cyber security. We will be an example to the world of what can be achieved through a cohesive and coherent National Cyber Security Strategy. organizations to develop further. 29 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY About the Cyber Security Review Public Consultation on Cyber Security What We Heard “The Government of Canada can provide much needed leadership by creating, adopting and modeling best practices for cyber security, and making efforts to transfer this knowledge to the private sector” “[There is a] need for more centralized governance and strategic planning … for modern legislation and regulations, and leadership in identifying, prioritizing, endorsing and disseminating the latest international standards of cyber security technology” “Collectively, we need to create an effective framework for cyber security governance, spanning principles, roles, and responsibilities within the government and across the public and private sectors” 30 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Security Strategy Goals Effective Leadership, Governance, and Collaboration The federal government, in close collaboration with provinces, territories, and the private sector, will take a leadership role to advance cyber security in Canada and will, in coordination with allies, work to shape the international cyber security environment in Canada’s favour. Responding to calls for decisive federal leadership, the Government of Canada will streamline the way it works and collaborates with external partners and stakeholders by establishing a clear focal point for authoritative advice, guidance, and cyber incident response. This approach will improve information sharing and make it easier for the private sector to obtain the support it needs. The Government of Canada will reinvigorate public awareness and engagement efforts and establish new forums for collaboration. The federal government will work in consultation with a cross section of Canadian stakeholders to ensure that we collectively enhance cyber security in Canada. The federal government will lead, in partnership with provinces, territories, and the private sector, the development of a national plan to prevent, mitigate and respond to cyber incidents, one that ensures efficient coordination and effective action. 31 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Security Strategy Goals The Government of Canada will work with its international partners to advance Canadian interests. This includes advocating for an open, free, and secure internet and enhancing our international cooperation to combat cybercrime. 32 of 35 NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Workbook Glossary App/Application An application, especially as downloaded by a user to a mobile device (for example, fitness tracking app). Artificial Intelligence The subfield of computer science concerned with developing intelligent computer programs that can solve problems, learn from experience, understand language, interpret visual scenes, and, in general, behave in a way that would be considered intelligent if observed in a human. Blockchain A blockchain is a write only database dispersed over a network of interconnected computers that uses cryptography (the computerized encoding and decoding of information) to create a tamperproof public record of transactions. Blockchain technology is transparent, secure and decentralised, meaning no central actor can alter the public record. being of Canadians and the effective functioning of government. Critical infrastructure can be stand alone or interconnected and interdependent within and across provinces, territories and national borders. Disruptions of critical infrastructure could result in catastrophic loss of life, adverse economic effects and significant harm to public confidence. Cyber Attack An attack that involves the unauthorized use, manipulation, interruption or destruction of, or access to, via electronic means, electronic information or the electronic devices or computer systems and networks used to process, transmit or store that information. Cyber Incident Any unauthorized attempt, whether successful or not, to gain access to, modify, destroy, delete or render unavailable any computer network or system resource. Cloud Computing Cyber Security The ability to access all required software, data and resources via a computer network instead of the traditional model where these are stored locally on a user’s computer. Critical Infrastructure Processes, systems, facilities, technologies, networks, assets and services essential to the health, safety, security or economic well The protection of digital information, as well as the integrity of the infrastructure housing and transmitting digital information. More specifically, cyber security includes the body of technologies, processes, practices and response and mitigation measures designed to protect networks, computers, programs and data from attack, damage or unauthorized access so as to ensure confidentiality, integrity and availability. 33 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Cyber Threat Encryption A threat actor, using the internet, who takes advantage of a known vulnerability in a product for the purposes of exploiting a network and the information the network carries. Cybercrime A crime committed with the aid of, or directly involving, a data processing system or computer network. The computer or its data may be the target of the crime or the computer may be the tool with which the crime is committed. Cyberspace Cryptology is discipline that embodies principles, means, and methods for the transformation of data in order to hide its information content, prevent its undetected modification and/or prevent its unauthorized use. The conversion of the information into this new protected form is referred to as encryption. The conversion of information back to its original form is decryption. Hacker Someone who uses computers and the Internet to access computers and servers without permission. The electronic world created by interconnected networks of information technology and the information on those networks. It is a global commons where more than 3 billion people are linked together to exchange ideas, services, and friendship. Data Breach The unauthorized disclosure of information that compromises the security, confidentiality, or integrity of personally identifiable information. Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) A type of denial of service attack in which an attacker uses a malicious code installed on various computers to attack a single Insider Threat A malicious threat to an organization that comes from people within the organization, such as employees, former employees, contractors or business associates, who have inside information concerning the organization’s security practices, data and computer systems. Intellectual Property (IP) According to the World Intellectual Property Organization, intellectual property (IP) is a creation of the mind. IP includes inventions, literary and artistic works, designs and symbols, and names and images used in business target. Internet of things E Commerce The buying and selling of information, products and services via the internet. The interconnection via the internet of computing devices embedded in everyday objects, enabling them to send and receive data. 34 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY Malicious Software/Malware Ransomware Malicious software designed to infiltrate or damage a computer system, without the owner’s consent. Common forms of malware include computer viruses, worms, Trojans, spyware, and adware. Software that denies you access to your files until you pay a ransom. Smart Cities Quantum Computing A quantum computer can process a vast number of calculations simultaneously. Whereas a classical computer works with ones and zeros, a quantum computer will have the advantage of using ones, zeros and “superpositions” of ones and zeros. Certain difficult tasks that have long been thought impossible for classical computers will be achieved quickly and efficiently by a quantum computer. Smart cities use digital technologies to enhance quality of life by making services more efficient, cost effective, and responsive for urban residents. Spear Phishing, Phishing The use of fraudulent emails to persuade people within an organization to reveal their usernames or passwords. Unlike phishing, which involves mass mailing, spear phishing is small scale and well targeted. 35 of 35 • NATiONAL CYBER SECURiTY STRATEGY The WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control was developed in response to the globalization of the tobacco epidemic. The spread of the tobacco epidemic is facilitated by a variety of complex factors with cross border effects, including trade liberalization, foreign direct investment, and other activities such as global marketing, transnational tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship, and the international movement of contraband and counterfeit cigarettes. The WHO FCTC is an evidence based treaty that reafﬁ rms the right of all people to the highest standard of health. WHO FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON TOBACCO CONTROL Convention Secretariat WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control World Health Organization Avenue Appia 20, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland Tel: +41 22 791 50 43 Fax: +41 22 791 58 30 Email: fctcsecretariat@who.int Web: www.who.int/fctc 789241 591010 fctc_cover_traité15_English.indd 1 fctc_cover_traité15_English.indd 1 2010 02 02 09:22:48 2010 02 02 09:22:48 fctc_cover_traité15_English.indd 1 fctc_cover_traité15_English.indd 1 WHO FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON TOBACCO CONTROL @ Gono WHO FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON TOBACCO CONTROL 2010 01 18 11:54:40 2010 01 18 11:54:40 WHO Library Cataloguing in Publication Data WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. 1.Tobacco supply and distribution 2.Tobacco industry legislation 3.Tobacco smoke pollution prevention and control 4.Tobacco use cessation 5.Treaties I.World Health Organization. ISBN 978 92 4 159101 0 (LC/NLM classification: HD 9130.6) © World Health Organization 2003, updated reprint 2004, 2005 All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22 791 2476; fax: +41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution should be addressed to WHO Press, at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int). The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement. The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters. All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either express or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use. Printed by the WHO Document Production Services, Geneva, Switzerland. WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control iv WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control FOREWORD The WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) is the first treaty negotiated under the auspices of the World Health Organization. The WHO FCTC is an evidence based treaty that reaffirms the right of all people to the highest standard of health. The WHO FCTC represents a paradigm shift in developing a regulatory strategy to address addictive substances; in contrast to previous drug control treaties, the WHO FCTC asserts the importance of demand reduction strategies as well as supply issues. The WHO FCTC was developed in response to the globalization of the tobacco epidemic. The spread of the tobacco epidemic is facilitated through a variety of complex factors with cross border effects, including trade liberalization and direct foreign investment. Other factors such as global marketing, transnational tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship, and the international movement of contraband and counterfeit cigarettes have also contributed to the explosive increase in tobacco use. From the first preambular paragraph, which states that the “Parties to this Convention [are] determined to give priority to their right to protect public health”, the WHO FCTC is a global trend setter. The core demand reduction provisions in the WHO FCTC are contained in articles 6 14: Price and tax measures to reduce the demand for tobacco, and Non price measures to reduce the demand for tobacco, namely: = Protection from exposure to tobacco smoke; = Regulation of the contents of tobacco products; = Regulation of tobacco product disclosures; = Packaging and labelling of tobacco products; = Education, communication, training and public awareness; = Tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship; and, = Demand reduction measures concerning tobacco dependence and cessation. The core supply reduction provisions in the WHO FCTC are contained in articles 15 17: Illicit trade in tobacco products; Sales to and by minors; and, Provision of support for economically viable alternative activities. Another novel feature of the Convention is the inclusion of a provision that addresses liability. Mechanisms for scientific and technical cooperation and exchange of information are set out in Articles 20 22 v WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control The WHO FCTC opened for signature on 16 June to 22 June 2003 in Geneva, and thereafter at the United Nations Headquarters in New York, the Depositary of the treaty, from 30 June 2003 to 29 June 2004. The treaty, which is now closed for signature, has 168 Signatories, including the European Community, which makes it one of the most widely embraced treaties in UN history. Member States that have signed the Convention indicate that they will strive in good faith to ratify, accept, or approve it, and show political commitment not to undermine the objectives set out in it. Countries wishing to become a Party, but that did not sign the Convention by 29 June 2004, may do so by means of accession, which is a one step process equivalent to ratification. The Convention entered into force on 27 February 2005 90 days after it has been acceded to, ratified, accepted, or approved by 40 States. Beginning on that date, the forty Contracting Parties are legally bound by the treaty's provisions. For each State that ratifies, accepts or approves the Convention or accedes thereto after the conditions set out in paragraph 1 of Article 36 for entry into force have been fulfilled, the Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. For regional economic integration organizations, the Convention enters into force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit of its instrument of formal confirmation or accession. The global network developed over the period of the negotiations of the WHO FCTC will be important in preparing for the implementation of the Convention at country level. In the words of WHO's Director General, Dr Jong wook LEE: "The WHO FCTC negotiations have already unleashed a process that has resulted in visible differences at country level. The success of the WHO FCTC as a tool for public health will depend on the energy and political commitment that we devote to implementing it in countries in the coming years. A successful result will be global public health gains for all." For this to materialize, the drive and commitment, which was so evident during the negotiations, will need to spread to national and local levels so that the WHO FCTC becomes a concrete reality where it counts most, in countries vi WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Preamble The Parties to this Convention, Determined to give priority to their right to protect public health, Recognizing that the spread of the tobacco epidemic is a global problem with serious consequences for public health that calls for the widest possible international cooperation and the participation of all countries in an effective, appropriate and comprehensive international response, Reflecting the concern of the international community about the devastating worldwide health, social, economic and environmental consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke, Seriously concerned about the increase in the worldwide consumption and production of cigarettes and other tobacco products, particularly in developing countries, as well as about the burden this places on families, on the poor, and on national health systems, Recognizing that scientific evidence has unequivocally established that tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke cause death, disease and disability, and that there is a time lag between the exposure to smoking and the other uses of tobacco products and the onset of tobacco related diseases, Recognizing also that cigarettes and some other products containing tobacco are highly engineered so as to create and maintain dependence, and that many of the compounds they contain and the smoke they produce are pharmacologically active, toxic, mutagenic and carcinogenic, and that tobacco dependence is separately classified as a disorder in major international classifications of diseases, Acknowledging that there is clear scientific evidence that prenatal exposure to tobacco smoke causes adverse health and developmental conditions for children, Deeply concerned about the escalation in smoking and other forms of tobacco consumption by children and adolescents worldwide, particularly smoking at increasingly early ages, Alarmed by the increase in smoking and other forms of tobacco consumption by women and young girls worldwide and keeping in mind the need for full participation of women at all levels of policy making and implementation and the need for gender specific tobacco control strategies, 1 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Deeply concerned about the high levels of smoking and other forms of tobacco consumption by indigenous peoples, Seriously concerned about the impact of all forms of advertising, promotion and sponsorship aimed at encouraging the use of tobacco products, Recognizing that cooperative action is necessary to eliminate all forms of illicit trade in cigarettes and other tobacco products, including smuggling, illicit manufacturing and counterfeiting, Acknowledging that tobacco control at all levels and particularly in developing countries and in countries with economies in transition requires sufficient financial and technical resources commensurate with the current and projected need for tobacco control activities, Recognizing the need to develop appropriate mechanisms to address the long term social and economic implications of successful tobacco demand reduction strategies, Mindful of the social and economic difficulties that tobacco control programmes may engender in the medium and long term in some developing countries and countries with economies in transition, and recognizing their need for technical and financial assistance in the context of nationally developed strategies for sustainable development, Conscious of the valuable work being conducted by many States on tobacco control and commending the leadership of the World Health Organization as well as the efforts of other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and other international and regional intergovernmental organizations in developing measures on tobacco control Emphasizing the special contribution of nongovernmental organizations and other members of civil society not affiliated with the tobacco industry, including health professional bodies, women’s, youth, environmental and consumer groups, and academic and health care institutions, to tobacco control efforts nationally and internationally and the vital importance of their participation in national and international tobacco control efforts, Recognizing the need to be alert to any efforts by the tobacco industry to undermine or subvert tobacco control efforts and the need to be informed of activities of the tobacco industry that have a negative impact on tobacco control efforts, Recalling Article 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 16 December 1966, which states that it is the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, 2 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Recalling also the preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization, which states that the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health is one of the fundamental rights of every human being without distinction of race, religion, political belief, economic or social condition, Determined to promote measures of tobacco control based on current and relevant scientific, technical and economic considerations, Recalling that the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 18 December 1979, provides that States Parties to that Convention shall take appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in the field of health care, Recalling further that the Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 20 November 1989, provides that States Parties to that Convention recognize the right of the child to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health, Have agreed, as follows: 3 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control PART I: INTRODUCTION Article 1 Use of terms For the purposes of this Convention: (a) “illicit trade” means any practice or conduct prohibited by law and which relates to production, shipment, receipt, possession, distribution, sale or purchase including any practice or conduct intended to facilitate such activity; (b) “regional economic integration organization” means an organization that is composed of several sovereign states, and to which its Member States have transferred competence over a range of matters, including the authority to make decisions binding on its Member States in respect of those matters;1 (c) “tobacco advertising and promotion” means any form of commercial communication, recommendation or action with the aim, effect or likely effect of promoting a tobacco product or tobacco use either directly or indirectly; (d) “tobacco control” means a range of supply, demand and harm reduction strategies that aim to improve the health of a population by eliminating or reducing their consumption of tobacco products and exposure to tobacco smoke; (e) of tobacco products; “tobacco industry” means tobacco manufacturers, wholesale distributors and importers (f) material which are manufactured to be used for smoking, sucking, chewing or snuffing; (g) “tobacco sponsorship” means any form of contribution to any event, activity or individual with the aim, effect or likely effect of promoting a tobacco product or tobacco use either directly or indirectly; 1 Where appropriate, national will refer equally to regional economic integration organizations. 4 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Article 2 Relationship between this Convention and other agreements and legal instruments 1. In order to better protect human health, Parties are encouraged to implement measures beyond those required by this Convention and its protocols, and nothing in these instruments shall prevent a Party from imposing stricter requirements that are consistent with their provisions and are in accordance with international law. The provisions of the Convention and its protocols shall in no way affect the right of 2. Parties to enter into bilateral or multilateral agreements, including regional or subregional agreements, on issues relevant or additional to the Convention and its protocols, provided that such agreements are compatible with their obligations under the Convention and its protocols. The Parties concerned shall communicate such agreements to the Conference of the Parties through the Secretariat PART II: OBJECTIVE, GUIDING PRINCIPLES AND GENERAL OBLIGATIONS Article 3 Objective The objective of this Convention and its protocols is to protect present and future generations from the devastating health, social, environmental and economic consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke by providing a framework for tobacco control measures to be implemented by the Parties at the national, regional and international levels in order to reduce continually and substantially the prevalence of tobacco use and exposure to tobacco smoke. Article 4 Guiding principles To achieve the objective of this Convention and its protocols and to implement its provisions, the Parties shall be guided, inter alia, by the principles set out below: 1. Every person should be informed of the health consequences, addictive nature and mortal threat posed by tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke and effective legislative, executive, administrative or other measures should be contemplated at the appropriate governmental level to protect all persons from exposure to tobacco smoke. 5 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 2. Strong political commitment is necessary to develop and support, at the national, regional and international levels, comprehensive multisectoral measures and coordinated responses, taking into consideration: (a) smoke; the need to take measures to protect all persons from exposure to tobacco (b) cessation, and to decrease the consumption of tobacco products in any form; the need to take measures to promote the participation of indigenous individuals (c) and communities in the development, implementation and evaluation of tobacco control programmes that are socially and culturally appropriate to their needs and perspectives; and (d) tobacco control strategies. the need to take measures to address gender specific risks when developing International cooperation, particularly transfer of technology, knowledge and financial 3. assistance and provision of related expertise, to establish and implement effective tobacco control programmes, taking into consideration local culture, as well as social, economic, political and legal factors, is an important part of the Convention. 4. Comprehensive multisectoral measures and responses to reduce consumption of all tobacco products at the national, regional and international levels are essential so as to prevent, in accordance with public health principles, the incidence of diseases, premature disability and mortality due to tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke. 5. important part of comprehensive tobacco control. Issues relating to liability, as determined by each Party within its jurisdiction, are an 6. The importance of technical and financial assistance to aid the economic transition of tobacco growers and workers whose livelihoods are seriously affected as a consequence of tobacco control programmes in developing country Parties, as well as Parties with economies in transition, should be recognized and addressed in the context of nationally developed strategies for sustainable development. 7. Convention and its protocols. The participation of civil society is essential in achieving the objective of the 6 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Article 5 General obligations 1. Each Party shall develop, implement, periodically update and review comprehensive multisectoral national tobacco control strategies, plans and programmes in accordance with this Convention and the protocols to which it is a Party. Towards this end, each Party shall, in accordance with its capabilities: (a) points for tobacco control; and establish or reinforce and finance a national coordinating mechanism or focal (b) adopt and implement effective legislative, executive, administrative and/or other measures and cooperate, as appropriate, with other Parties in developing appropriate policies for preventing and reducing tobacco consumption, nicotine addiction and exposure to tobacco smoke. In setting and implementing their public health policies with respect to tobacco control, 3. Parties shall act to protect these policies from commercial and other vested interests of the tobacco industry in accordance with national law. The Parties shall cooperate in the formulation of proposed measures, procedures and 4. guidelines for the implementation of the Convention and the protocols to which they are Parties. 5. The Parties shall cooperate, as appropriate, with competent international and regional intergovernmental organizations and other bodies to achieve the objectives of the Convention and the protocols to which they are Parties. 6. The Parties shall, within means and resources at their disposal, cooperate to raise financial resources for effective implementation of the Convention through bilateral and multilateral funding mechanisms. PART III: MEASURES RELATING TO THE REDUCTION OF DEMAND FOR TOBACCO Article 6 Price and tax measures to reduce the demand for tobacco 1. The Parties recognize that price and tax measures are an effective and important means of reducing tobacco consumption by various segments of the population, in particular young persons. 7 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 2. Without prejudice to the sovereign right of the Parties to determine and establish their taxation policies, each Party should take account of its national health objectives concerning tobacco control and adopt or maintain, as appropriate, measures which may include: (a) implementing tax policies and, where appropriate, price policies, on tobacco products so as to contribute to the health objectives aimed at reducing tobacco consumption; and (b) international travellers of tax and duty free tobacco products. prohibiting or restricting, as appropriate, sales to and/or importations by 3. The Parties shall provide rates of taxation for tobacco products and trends in tobacco consumption in their periodic reports to the Conference of the Parties, in accordance with Article 21. Article 7 Non price measures to reduce the demand for tobacco The Parties recognize that comprehensive non price measures are an effective and important means of reducing tobacco consumption. Each Party shall adopt and implement effective legislative, executive, administrative or other measures necessary to implement its obligations pursuant to Articles 8 to 13 and shall cooperate, as appropriate, with each other directly or through competent international bodies with a view to their implementation. The Conference of the Parties shall propose appropriate guidelines for the implementation of the provisions of these Articles. Article 8 Protection from exposure to tobacco smoke 1. exposure to tobacco smoke causes death, disease and disability. Parties recognize that scientific evidence has unequivocally established that 2. determined by national law and actively promote at other jurisdictional levels the adoption and implementation of effective legislative, executive, administrative and/or other measures, providing for protection from exposure to tobacco smoke in indoor workplaces, public transport, indoor public places and, as appropriate, other public places. 8 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Article 9 Regulation of the contents of tobacco products The Conference of the Parties, in consultation with competent international bodies, shall propose guidelines for testing and measuring the contents and emissions of tobacco products, and for the regulation of these contents and emissions. Each Party shall, where approved by competent national authorities, adopt and implement effective legislative, executive and administrative or other measures for such testing and measuring, and for such regulation. Article 10 Regulation of tobacco product disclosures Each Party shall, in accordance with its national law, adopt and implement effective legislative, executive, administrative or other measures requiring manufacturers and importers of tobacco products to disclose to governmental authorities information about the contents and emissions of tobacco products. Each Party shall further adopt and implement effective measures for public disclosure of information about the toxic constituents of the tobacco products and the emissions that they may produce. Article 11 Packaging and labelling of tobacco products 1. Each Party shall, within a period of three years after entry into force of this Convention for that Party, adopt and implement, in accordance with its national law, effective measures to ensure that: (a) tobacco product packaging and labelling do not promote a tobacco product by any means that are false, misleading, deceptive or likely to create an erroneous impression about its characteristics, health effects, hazards or emissions, including any term, descriptor, trademark, figurative or any other sign that directly or indirectly creates the false impression that a particular tobacco product is less harmful than other tobacco products. These may include terms such as “low tar”, “light”, “ultra light”, or “mild”; and (b) each unit packet and package of tobacco products and any outside packaging and labelling of such products also carry health warnings describing the harmful effects of tobacco use, and may include other appropriate messages. These warnings and messages: (i) shall be approved by the competent national authority, 9 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (ii) shall be rotating, (iii) shall be large, clear, visible and legible, (iv) should be 50% or more of the principal display areas but shall be no less than 30% of the principal display areas, (v) may be in the form of or include pictures or pictograms. Each unit packet and package of tobacco products and any outside packaging and 2. labelling of such products shall, in addition to the warnings specified in paragraph 1(b) of this Article, contain information on relevant constituents and emissions of tobacco products as defined by national authorities. Each Party shall require that the warnings and other textual information specified in 3. paragraphs 1(b) and paragraph 2 of this Article will appear on each unit packet and package of tobacco products and any outside packaging and labelling of such products in its principal language or languages. 4. For the purposes of this Article, the term “outside packaging and labelling” in relation to tobacco products applies to any packaging and labelling used in the retail sale of the product Article 12 Education, communication, training and public awareness Each Party shall promote and strengthen public awareness of tobacco control issues, using all available communication tools, as appropriate. Towards this end, each Party shall adopt and implement effective legislative, executive, administrative or other measures to promote: (a) broad access to effective and comprehensive educational and public awareness programmes on the health risks including the addictive characteristics of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke; (b) public awareness about the health risks of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke, and about the benefits of the cessation of tobacco use and tobacco free lifestyles as specified in Article 14.2; (c) on the tobacco industry as relevant to the objective of this Convention; public access, in accordance with national law, to a wide range of information 10 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (d) effective and appropriate training or sensitization and awareness programmes on tobacco control addressed to persons such as health workers, community workers, social workers, media professionals, educators, decision makers, administrators and other concerned persons; (e) awareness and participation of public and private agencies and nongovernmental organizations not affiliated with the tobacco industry in developing and implementing intersectoral programmes and strategies for tobacco control; and (f) economic, and environmental consequences of tobacco production and consumption Article 13 Tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship 1. would reduce the consumption of tobacco products. Parties recognize that a comprehensive ban on advertising, promotion and sponsorship 2. Each Party shall, in accordance with its constitution or constitutional principles, undertake a comprehensive ban of all tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship. This shall include, subject to the legal environment and technical means available to that Party, a comprehensive ban on cross border advertising, promotion and sponsorship originating from its territory. In this respect, within the period of five years after entry into force of this Convention for that Party, each Party shall undertake appropriate legislative, executive, administrative and/or other measures and report accordingly in conformity with Article 21. 3. A Party that is not in a position to undertake a comprehensive ban due to its constitution or constitutional principles shall apply restrictions on all tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship. This shall include, subject to the legal environment and technical means available to that Party, restrictions or a comprehensive ban on advertising, promotion and sponsorship originating from its territory with cross border effects. In this respect, each Party shall undertake appropriate legislative, executive, administrative and/or other measures and report accordingly in conformity with Article 21. 4. Party shall: As a minimum, and in accordance with its constitution or constitutional principles, each prohibit all forms of tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship that (a) promote a tobacco product by any means that are false, misleading or deceptive or likely to create an erroneous impression about its characteristics, health effects, hazards or emissions; 11 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (b) tobacco advertising and, as appropriate, promotion and sponsorship; require that health or other appropriate warnings or messages accompany all (c) tobacco products by the public; restrict the use of direct or indirect incentives that encourage the purchase of (d) require, if it does not have a comprehensive ban, the disclosure to relevant governmental authorities of expenditures by the tobacco industry on advertising, promotion and sponsorship not yet prohibited. Those authorities may decide to make those figures available, subject to national law, to the public and to the Conference of the Parties, pursuant to Article 21; (e) undertake a comprehensive ban or, in the case of a Party that is not in a position to undertake a comprehensive ban due to its constitution or constitutional principles, restrict tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship on radio, television, print media and, as appropriate, other media, such as the internet, within a period of five years; and prohibit, or in the case of a Party that is not in a position to prohibit due to its (f) constitution or constitutional principles restrict, tobacco sponsorship of international events, activities and/or participants therein. 5. paragraph 4. Parties are encouraged to implement measures beyond the obligations set out in 6. facilitate the elimination of cross border advertising. Parties shall cooperate in the development of technologies and other means necessary to 7. Parties which have a ban on certain forms of tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship have the sovereign right to ban those forms of cross border tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship entering their territory and to impose equal penalties as those applicable to domestic advertising, promotion and sponsorship originating from their territory in accordance with their national law. This paragraph does not endorse or approve of any particular penalty 8. Parties shall consider the elaboration of a protocol setting out appropriate measures that require international collaboration for a comprehensive ban on cross border advertising, promotion and sponsorship. 12 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Article 14 Demand reduction measures concerning tobacco dependence and cessation 1. Each Party shall develop and disseminate appropriate, comprehensive and integrated guidelines based on scientific evidence and best practices, taking into account national circumstances and priorities, and shall take effective measures to promote cessation of tobacco use and adequate treatment for tobacco dependence. Towards this end, each Party shall endeavour to: (a) design and implement effective programmes aimed at promoting the cessation of tobacco use, in such locations as educational institutions, health care facilities, workplaces and sporting environments; (b) include diagnosis and treatment of tobacco dependence and counselling services on cessation of tobacco use in national health and education programmes, plans and strategies, with the participation of health workers, community workers and social workers as appropriate; (c) diagnosing, counselling, preventing and treating tobacco dependence; and (d) collaborate with other Parties to facilitate accessibility and affordability for treatment of tobacco dependence including pharmaceutical products pursuant to Article 22. Such products and their constituents may include medicines, products used to administer medicines and diagnostics when appropriate. PART IV: MEASURES RELATING TO THE REDUCTION OF THE SUPPLY OF TOBACCO Article 15 Illicit trade in tobacco products 1. products, including smuggling, illicit manufacturing and counterfeiting, and the development and implementation of related national law, in addition to subregional, regional and global agreements, are essential components of tobacco control. 2. Each Party shall adopt and implement effective legislative, executive, administrative or other measures to ensure that all unit packets and packages of tobacco products and any outside packaging of such products are marked to assist Parties in determining the origin of 13 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control tobacco products, and in accordance with national law and relevant bilateral or multilateral agreements, assist Parties in determining the point of diversion and monitor, document and control the movement of tobacco products and their legal status. In addition, each Party shall: (a) require that unit packets and packages of tobacco products for retail and wholesale use that are sold on its domestic market carry the statement: “Sales only allowed in (insert name of the country, subnational, regional or federal unit)” or carry any other effective marking indicating the final destination or which would assist authorities in determining whether the product is legally for sale on the domestic market; and (b) consider, as appropriate, developing a practical tracking and tracing regime that would further secure the distribution system and assist in the investigation of illicit trade. 3. Each Party shall require that the packaging information or marking specified in paragraph 2 of this Article shall be presented in legible form and/or appear in its principal language or languages. 4. With a view to eliminating illicit trade in tobacco products, each Party shall: (a) monitor and collect data on cross border trade in tobacco products, including illicit trade, and exchange information among customs, tax and other authorities, as appropriate, and in accordance with national law and relevant applicable bilateral or multilateral agreements; (b) illicit trade in tobacco products, including counterfeit and contraband cigarettes; (c) take appropriate steps to ensure that all confiscated manufacturing equipment, counterfeit and contraband cigarettes and other tobacco products are destroyed, using environmentally friendly methods where feasible, or disposed of in accordance with national law; adopt and implement measures to monitor, document and control the storage (d) and distribution of tobacco products held or moving under suspension of taxes or duties within its jurisdiction; and (e) from the illicit trade in tobacco products. adopt measures as appropriate to enable the confiscation of proceeds derived 14 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 5. Information collected pursuant to subparagraphs 4(a) and 4(d) of this Article shall, as appropriate, be provided in aggregate form by the Parties in their periodic reports to the Conference of the Parties, in accordance with Article 21. 6. The Parties shall, as appropriate and in accordance with national law, promote cooperation between national agencies, as well as relevant regional and international intergovernmental organizations as it relates to investigations, prosecutions and proceedings, with a view to eliminating illicit trade in tobacco products. Special emphasis shall be placed on cooperation at regional and subregional levels to combat illicit trade of tobacco products. Each Party shall endeavour to adopt and implement further measures including 7. licensing, where appropriate, to control or regulate the production and distribution of tobacco products in order to prevent illicit trade Article 16 Sales to and by minors 1. or other measures at the appropriate government level to prohibit the sales of tobacco products to persons under the age set by domestic law, national law or eighteen. These measures may include: requiring that all sellers of tobacco products place a clear and prominent (a) indicator inside their point of sale about the prohibition of tobacco sales to minors and, in case of doubt, request that each tobacco purchaser provide appropriate evidence of having reached full legal age; (b) accessible, such as store shelves; banning the sale of tobacco products in any manner by which they are directly (c) in the form of tobacco products which appeal to minors; and prohibiting the manufacture and sale of sweets, snacks, toys or any other objects (d) to minors and do not promote the sale of tobacco products to minors. ensuring that tobacco vending machines under its jurisdiction are not accessible 2. products to the public and especially minors. Each Party shall prohibit or promote the prohibition of the distribution of free tobacco 3. packets which increase the affordability of such products to minors. Each Party shall endeavour to prohibit the sale of cigarettes individually or in small 15 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 4. The Parties recognize that in order to increase their effectiveness, measures to prevent tobacco product sales to minors should, where appropriate, be implemented in conjunction with other provisions contained in this Convention. 5. When signing, ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the Convention or at any time thereafter, a Party may, by means of a binding written declaration, indicate its commitment to prohibit the introduction of tobacco vending machines within its jurisdiction or, as appropriate, to a total ban on tobacco vending machines. The declaration made pursuant to this Article shall be circulated by the Depositary to all Parties to the Convention. Each Party shall adopt and implement effective legislative, executive, administrative or 6. other measures, including penalties against sellers and distributors, in order to ensure compliance with the obligations contained in paragraphs 1 5 of this Article. Each Party should, as appropriate, adopt and implement effective legislative, executive, 7. administrative or other measures to prohibit the sales of tobacco products by persons under the age set by domestic law, national law or eighteen Article 17 Provision of support for economically viable alternative activities Parties shall, in cooperation with each other and with competent international and regional intergovernmental organizations, promote, as appropriate, economically viable alternatives for tobacco workers, growers and, as the case may be, individual sellers. PART V: PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT Article 18 Protection of the environment and the health of persons In carrying out their obligations under this Convention, the Parties agree to have due regard to the protection of the environment and the health of persons in relation to the environment in respect of tobacco cultivation and manufacture within their respective territories. 16 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control PART VI: QUESTIONS RELATED TO LIABILITY Article 19 Liability For the purpose of tobacco control, the Parties shall consider taking legislative action or 1. promoting their existing laws, where necessary, to deal with criminal and civil liability, including compensation where appropriate. 2. Conference of the Parties in accordance with Article 21 including: Parties shall cooperate with each other in exchanging information through the (a) exposure to tobacco smoke in accordance with Article 20.3(a); and information on the health effects of the consumption of tobacco products and (b) jurisprudence. information on legislation and regulations in force as well as pertinent 3. The Parties shall, as appropriate and mutually agreed, within the limits of national legislation, policies, legal practices and applicable existing treaty arrangements, afford one another assistance in legal proceedings relating to civil and criminal liability consistent with this Convention. 4. other’s courts where such rights exist. The Convention shall in no way affect or limit any rights of access of the Parties to each 5. The Conference of the Parties may consider, if possible, at an early stage, taking account of the work being done in relevant international fora, issues related to liability including appropriate international approaches to these issues and appropriate means to support, upon request, the Parties in their legislative and other activities in accordance with this Article Article 20 Research, surveillance and exchange of information 1. The Parties undertake to develop and promote national research and to coordinate research programmes at the regional and international levels in the field of tobacco control. Towards this end, each Party shall: 17 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (a) initiate and cooperate in, directly or through competent international and regional intergovernmental organizations and other bodies, the conduct of research and scientific assessments, and in so doing promote and encourage research that addresses the determinants and consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke as well as research for identification of alternative crops; and promote and strengthen, with the support of competent international and (b) regional intergovernmental organizations and other bodies, training and support for all those engaged in tobacco control activities, including research, implementation and evaluation. 2. The Parties shall establish, as appropriate, programmes for national, regional and global surveillance of the magnitude, patterns, determinants and consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke. Towards this end, the Parties should integrate tobacco surveillance programmes into national, regional and global health surveillance programmes so that data are comparable and can be analysed at the regional and international levels, as appropriate. Parties recognize the importance of financial and technical assistance from international 3. and regional intergovernmental organizations and other bodies. Each Party shall endeavour to: (a) tobacco consumption and related social, economic and health indicators; (b) cooperate with competent international and regional intergovernmental organizations and other bodies, including governmental and nongovernmental agencies, in regional and global tobacco surveillance and exchange of information on the indicators specified in paragraph 3(a) of this Article; and (c) cooperate with the World Health Organization in the development of general guidelines or procedures for defining the collection, analysis and dissemination of tobacco related surveillance data. 4. The Parties shall, subject to national law, promote and facilitate the exchange of publicly available scientific, technical, socioeconomic, commercial and legal information, as well as information regarding practices of the tobacco industry and the cultivation of tobacco, which is relevant to this Convention, and in so doing shall take into account and address the special needs of developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition. Each Party shall endeavour to: (a) progressively establish and maintain an updated database of laws and regulations on tobacco control and, as appropriate, information about their 18 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control enforcement, as well as pertinent jurisprudence, and cooperate in the development of programmes for regional and global tobacco control; (b) programmes in accordance with paragraph 3(a) of this Article; and progressively establish and maintain updated data from national surveillance (c) cooperate with competent international organizations to progressively establish and maintain a global system to regularly collect and disseminate information on tobacco production, manufacture and the activities of the tobacco industry which have an impact on the Convention or national tobacco control activities. 5. Parties should cooperate in regional and international intergovernmental organizations and financial and development institutions of which they are members, to promote and encourage provision of technical and financial resources to the Secretariat to assist developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition to meet their commitments on research, surveillance and exchange of information Article 21 Reporting and exchange of information 1. Each Party shall submit to the Conference of the Parties, through the Secretariat, periodic reports on its implementation of this Convention, which should include the following: (a) implement the Convention; information on legislative, executive, administrative or other measures taken to information, as appropriate, on any constraints or barriers encountered in its (b) implementation of the Convention, and on the measures taken to overcome these barriers; (c) received for tobacco control activities; information, as appropriate, on financial and technical assistance provided or information on surveillance and research as specified in Article 20; and information specified in Articles 6.3, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4(d), 15.5 and 19.2. 2. The frequency and format of such reports by all Parties shall be determined by the Conference of the Parties. Each Party shall make its initial report within two years of the entry into force of the Convention for that Party. 19 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 3. The Conference of the Parties, pursuant to Articles 22 and 26, shall consider arrangements to assist developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition, at their request, in meeting their obligations under this Article. 4. The reporting and exchange of information under the Convention shall be subject to national law regarding confidentiality and privacy. The Parties shall protect, as mutually agreed, any confidential information that is exchanged. Article 22 Cooperation in the scientific, technical, and legal fields and provision of related expertise 1. The Parties shall cooperate directly or through competent international bodies to strengthen their capacity to fulfill the obligations arising from this Convention, taking into account the needs of developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition. Such cooperation shall promote the transfer of technical, scientific and legal expertise and technology, as mutually agreed, to establish and strengthen national tobacco control strategies, plans and programmes aiming at, inter alia: (a) knowledge, skills, capacity and expertise related to tobacco control; facilitation of the development, transfer and acquisition of technology, (b) provision of technical, scientific, legal and other expertise to establish and strengthen national tobacco control strategies, plans and programmes, aiming at implementation of the Convention through, inter alia: (i) assisting, upon request, in the development of a strong legislative foundation as well as technical programmes, including those on prevention of initiation, promotion of cessation and protection from exposure to tobacco smoke; (ii) assisting, as appropriate, tobacco workers in the development of appropriate economically and legally viable alternative livelihoods in an economically viable manner; and (iii) assisting, as appropriate, tobacco growers in shifting agricultural production to alternative crops in an economically viable manner; (c) personnel in accordance with Article 12; support for appropriate training or sensitization programmes for appropriate (d) well as logistical support, for tobacco control strategies, plans and programmes; 20 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (e) treatment of nicotine addiction; and identification of methods for tobacco control, including comprehensive (f) comprehensive treatment of nicotine addiction. promotion, as appropriate, of research to increase the affordability of 2. The Conference of the Parties shall promote and facilitate transfer of technical, scientific and legal expertise and technology with the financial support secured in accordance with Article 26 PART VIII: INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES Article 23 Conference of the Parties A Conference of the Parties is hereby established. The first session of the Conference 1. shall be convened by the World Health Organization not later than one year after the entry into force of this Convention. The Conference will determine the venue and timing of subsequent regular sessions at its first session. 2. Extraordinary sessions of the Conference of the Parties shall be held at such other times as may be deemed necessary by the Conference, or at the written request of any Party, provided that, within six months of the request being communicated to them by the Secretariat of the Convention, it is supported by at least one third of the Parties. 3. session. The Conference of the Parties shall adopt by consensus its Rules of Procedure at its first 4. The Conference of the Parties shall by consensus adopt financial rules for itself as well as governing the funding of any subsidiary bodies it may establish as well as financial provisions governing the functioning of the Secretariat. At each ordinary session, it shall adopt a budget for the financial period until the next ordinary session. 5. The Conference of the Parties shall keep under regular review the implementation of the Convention and take the decisions necessary to promote its effective implementation and may adopt protocols, annexes and amendments to the Convention, in accordance with Articles 28, 29 and 33. Towards this end, it shall: (a) 21; promote and facilitate the exchange of information pursuant to Articles 20 and 21 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (b) promote and guide the development and periodic refinement of comparable methodologies for research and the collection of data, in addition to those provided for in Article 20, relevant to the implementation of the Convention; (c) promote, as appropriate, the development, implementation and evaluation of strategies, plans, and programmes, as well as policies, legislation and other measures; (d) adopt regular reports on the implementation of the Convention; consider reports submitted by the Parties in accordance with Article 21 and (e) implementation of the Convention in accordance with Article 26; promote and facilitate the mobilization of financial resources for the (f) Convention; establish such subsidiary bodies as are necessary to achieve the objective of the (g) request, where appropriate, the services and cooperation of, and information provided by, competent and relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and other international and regional intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations and bodies as a means of strengthening the implementation of the Convention; and (h) Convention in the light of experience gained in its implementation. consider other action, as appropriate, for the achievement of the objective of the 6. observers at its proceedings. The Conference of the Parties shall establish the criteria for the participation of Article 24 Secretariat 1. The Conference of the Parties shall designate a permanent secretariat and make arrangements for its functioning. The Conference of the Parties shall endeavour to do so at its first session. 2. functions under this Convention shall be provided by the World Health Organization. Secretariat functions shall be: (a) subsidiary bodies and to provide them with services as required; to make arrangements for sessions of the Conference of the Parties and any 22 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control to transmit reports received by it pursuant to the Convention; (c) to provide support to the Parties, particularly developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition, on request, in the compilation and communication of information required in accordance with the provisions of the Convention; (d) the Conference of the Parties and submit them to the Conference of the Parties; (e) to ensure, under the guidance of the Conference of the Parties, the necessary coordination with the competent international and regional intergovernmental organizations and other bodies; (f) to enter, under the guidance of the Conference of the Parties, into such administrative or contractual arrangements as may be required for the effective discharge of its functions; and (g) to perform other secretariat functions specified by the Convention and by any of its protocols and such other functions as may be determined by the Conference of the Parties. Article 25 Relations between the Conference of the Parties and intergovernmental organizations In order to provide technical and financial cooperation for achieving the objective of this Convention, the Conference of the Parties may request the cooperation of competent international and regional intergovernmental organizations including financial and development institutions Article 26 Financial resources 1. objective of this Convention. The Parties recognize the important role that financial resources play in achieving the 2. Each Party shall provide financial support in respect of its national activities intended to achieve the objective of the Convention, in accordance with its national plans, priorities and programmes. 3. Parties shall promote, as appropriate, the utilization of bilateral, regional, subregional and other multilateral channels to provide funding for the development and strengthening of 23 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control multisectoral comprehensive tobacco control programmes of developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition. Accordingly, economically viable alternatives to tobacco production, including crop diversification should be addressed and supported in the context of nationally developed strategies of sustainable development. 4. Parties represented in relevant regional and international intergovernmental organizations, and financial and development institutions shall encourage these entities to provide financial assistance for developing country Parties and for Parties with economies in transition to assist them in meeting their obligations under the Convention, without limiting the rights of participation within these organizations. 5. The Parties agree that: (a) to assist Parties in meeting their obligations under the Convention, all relevant potential and existing resources, financial, technical, or otherwise, both public and private that are available for tobacco control activities, should be mobilized and utilized for the benefit of all Parties, especially developing countries and countries with economies in transition; (b) the Secretariat shall advise developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition, upon request, on available sources of funding to facilitate the implementation of their obligations under the Convention; (c) the Conference of the Parties in its first session shall review existing and potential sources and mechanisms of assistance based on a study conducted by the Secretariat and other relevant information, and consider their adequacy; and (d) the results of this review shall be taken into account by the Conference of the Parties in determining the necessity to enhance existing mechanisms or to establish a voluntary global fund or other appropriate financial mechanisms to channel additional financial resources, as needed, to developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition to assist them in meeting the objectives of the Convention PART IX: SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES Article 27 Settlement of disputes In the event of a dispute between two or more Parties concerning the interpretation or 1. application of this Convention, the Parties concerned shall seek through diplomatic channels a settlement of the dispute through negotiation or any other peaceful means of their own choice, including good offices, mediation, or conciliation. Failure to reach agreement by good offices, 24 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control mediation or conciliation shall not absolve parties to the dispute from the responsibility of continuing to seek to resolve it. 2. When ratifying, accepting, approving, formally confirming or acceding to the Convention, or at any time thereafter, a State or regional economic integration organization may declare in writing to the Depositary that, for a dispute not resolved in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, it accepts, as compulsory, ad hoc arbitration in accordance with procedures to be adopted by consensus by the Conference of the Parties. 3. parties to the protocol, unless otherwise provided therein. The provisions of this Article shall apply with respect to any protocol as between the PART X: DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONVENTION Article 28 Amendments to this Convention 1. considered by the Conference of the Parties. Any Party may propose amendments to this Convention. Such amendments will be 2. Amendments to the Convention shall be adopted by the Conference of the Parties. The text of any proposed amendment to the Convention shall be communicated to the Parties by the Secretariat at least six months before the session at which it is proposed for adoption. The Secretariat shall also communicate proposed amendments to the signatories of the Convention and, for information, to the Depositary. 3. The Parties shall make every effort to reach agreement by consensus on any proposed amendment to the Convention. If all efforts at consensus have been exhausted, and no agreement reached, the amendment shall as a last resort be adopted by a three quarters majority vote of the Parties present and voting at the session. For purposes of this Article, Parties present and voting means Parties present and casting an affirmative or negative vote. Any adopted amendment shall be communicated by the Secretariat to the Depositary, who shall circulate it to all Parties for acceptance. Instruments of acceptance in respect of an amendment shall be deposited with the 4. Depositary. An amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article shall enter into force for those Parties having accepted it on the ninetieth day after the date of receipt by the Depositary of an instrument of acceptance by at least two thirds of the Parties to the Convention. 5. The amendment shall enter into force for any other Party on the ninetieth day after the date on which that Party deposits with the Depositary its instrument of acceptance of the said amendment. 25 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Article 29 Adoption and amendment of annexes to this Convention 1. shall enter into force in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article 28. 2. Annexes to the Convention shall form an integral part thereof and, unless otherwise expressly provided, a reference to the Convention constitutes at the same time a reference to any annexes thereto. 3. procedural, scientific, technical or administrative matters. Annexes shall be restricted to lists, forms and any other descriptive material relating to PART XI: FINAL PROVISIONS Article 30 Reservations No reservations may be made to this Convention. Article 31 Withdrawal 1. At any time after two years from the date on which this Convention has entered into force for a Party, that Party may withdraw from the Convention by giving written notification to the Depositary. 2. Any such withdrawal shall take effect upon expiry of one year from the date of receipt by the Depositary of the notification of withdrawal, or on such later date as may be specified in the notification of withdrawal. 3. withdrawn from any protocol to which it is a Party. Any Party that withdraws from the Convention shall be considered as also having 26 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Article 32 Right to vote 1. paragraph 2 of this Article. Each Party to this Convention shall have one vote, except as provided for in 2. Regional economic integration organizations, in matters within their competence, shall exercise their right to vote with a number of votes equal to the number of their Member States that are Parties to the Convention. Such an organization shall not exercise its right to vote if any of its Member States exercises its right, and vice versa. Article 33 Protocols 1. of the Parties. Any Party may propose protocols. Such proposals will be considered by the Conference The Conference of the Parties may adopt protocols to this Convention. In adopting 2. these protocols every effort shall be made to reach consensus. If all efforts at consensus have been exhausted, and no agreement reached, the protocol shall as a last resort be adopted by a three quarters majority vote of the Parties present and voting at the session. For the purposes of this Article, Parties present and voting means Parties present and casting an affirmative or negative vote. 3. Secretariat at least six months before the session at which it is proposed for adoption. Only Parties to the Convention may be parties to a protocol. Any protocol to the Convention shall be binding only on the parties to the protocol in 5. question. Only Parties to a protocol may take decisions on matters exclusively relating to the protocol in question. 6. instrument. The requirements for entry into force of any protocol shall be established by that Article 34 Signature This Convention shall be open for signature by all Members of the World Health Organization and by any States that are not Members of the World Health Organization but are members of the United Nations and by regional economic integration organizations at 27 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control the World Health Organization headquarters in Geneva from 16 June 2003 to 22 June 2003, and thereafter at United Nations Headquarters in New York, from 30 June 2003 to 29 June 2004. Article 35 Ratification, acceptance, approval, formal confirmation or accession 1. This Convention shall be subject to ratification, acceptance, approval or accession by States and to formal confirmation or accession by regional economic integration organizations. It shall be open for accession from the day after the date on which the Convention is closed for signature. Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval, formal confirmation or accession shall be deposited with the Depositary. Any regional economic integration organization which becomes a Party to the 2. Convention without any of its Member States being a Party shall be bound by all the obligations under the Convention. In the case of those organizations, one or more of whose Member States is a Party to the Convention, the organization and its Member States shall decide on their respective responsibilities for the performance of their obligations under the Convention. In such cases, the organization and the Member States shall not be entitled to exercise rights under the Convention concurrently. 3. Regional economic integration organizations shall, in their instruments relating to formal confirmation or in their instruments of accession, declare the extent of their competence with respect to the matters governed by the Convention. These organizations shall also inform the Depositary, who shall in turn inform the Parties, of any substantial modification in the extent of their competence. Article 36 Entry into force 1. This Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit of the fortieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval, formal confirmation or accession with the Depositary. For each State that ratifies, accepts or approves the Convention or accedes thereto after 2. the conditions set out in paragraph 1 of this Article for entry into force have been fulfilled, the Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. 3. For each regional economic integration organization depositing an instrument of formal confirmation or an instrument of accession after the conditions set out in paragraph 1 of this Article for entry into force have been fulfilled, the Convention shall enter into force on the 28 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control ninetieth day following the date of its depositing of the instrument of formal confirmation or of accession. 4. For the purposes of this Article, any instrument deposited by a regional economic integration organization shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by States Members of the organization Article 37 Depositary The Secretary General of the United Nations shall be the Depositary of this Convention and amendments thereto and of protocols and annexes adopted in accordance with Articles 28, 29 and 33. Article 38 Authentic texts The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the United Nations. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized to that effect, have signed this Convention. DONE at GENEVA this twenty first day of May two thousand and three. 29 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Annex 1: WHA 56.1 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control The Fifty sixth World Health Assembly, Recalling resolutions WHA49.17 and WHA52.18 calling for the development of a WHO framework convention on tobacco control in accordance with Article 19 of the Constitution of WHO; Determined to protect present and future generations from tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke; Noting with profound concern the escalation in smoking and other forms of tobacco use worldwide; Acknowledging with appreciation the report of the Chair of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body on the outcome of the work of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body;2 Convinced that this convention is a groundbreaking step in advancing national, regional and international action and global cooperation to protect human health against the devastating impact of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke, and mindful that special consideration should be given to the particular situation of developing countries and countries with economies in transition; Emphasizing the need for expeditious entry into force and effective implementation of the convention, ADOPTS the Convention attached to this resolution; 2. NOTES, in accordance with Article 34 of the Convention, that the Convention shall be open for signature at WHO headquarters in Geneva, from 16 June 2003 to 22 June 2003, and thereafter at United Nations Headquarters in New York, from 30 June 2003 to 29 June 2004; 3. to do so, to consider signing, ratifying, accepting, approving, formally confirming or acceding to the Convention at the earliest opportunity, with a view to bringing the Convention into force as soon as possible; 2 Document A56/INF.DOC./7 Rev.1. 30 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 4. into force of the Convention, to take all appropriate measures to curb tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke; 5. and other interested parties to support the preparatory activities referred to in this resolution and effectively to encourage prompt entry into force and implementation of the Convention; 6. CALLS UPON the United Nations and invites other relevant international organizations to continue to provide support for strengthening national and international tobacco control programmes; 7. World Health Assembly, an open ended intergovernmental working group that shall be open to all States and regional economic integration organizations referred to in Article 34 of the Convention in order to consider and prepare proposals on those issues identified in the Convention for consideration and adoption, as appropriate, by the first session of the Conference of the Parties; such issues should include: (1) rules of procedure for the Conference of the Parties (Article 23.3), including criteria for participation of observers at sessions of the Conference of the Parties (Article 23.6); (2) functioning (Article 24.1); options for the designation of a permanent secretariat and arrangements for its (3) financial provisions governing the functioning of the secretariat (Article 23.4); a draft budget for the first financial period (Article 23.4); (5) Parties in meeting their obligations under the Convention (Article 26.5); 8. FURTHER DECIDES that the Open ended Intergovernmental Working Group shall also oversee preparations for the first session of the Conference of the Parties and report directly to it; 9. RESOLVES that decisions that had been taken by the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body on the WHO framework convention on tobacco control concerning the participation of nongovernmental organizations shall apply the Open ended Intergovernmental Working Group; 31 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control REQUESTS the Director General: (1) permanent secretariat is designated and established; to provide secretariat functions under the Convention until such time as a to take appropriate steps to provide support to Member States, in particular (2) developing countries and countries with economies in transition, in preparation for entry into force of the Convention; (3) the Conference of session of Intergovernmental Working Group; to convene, as frequently as necessary, between 16 June 2003 and the first the Open ended the Parties, meetings of (4) direction and support for global tobacco control; to continue to ensure that WHO plays a key role in providing technical advice, (5) to keep the Health Assembly informed of progress made toward entry into force of the Convention and of preparations under way for the first session of the Conference of the Parties. 32 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Annex 2: History of the WHO FCTC process The idea of an international instrument for tobacco was initiated with the adoption of Resolution WHA 48.11 in May 1995, requesting the Director General to report to the Forty ninth Session of the World Health Assembly on the feasibility of developing an international instrument such as guidelines, a declaration, or an international convention on tobacco control. As a result of Resolution WHA48.11, WHO was requested to draft a feasibility study which was presented by the Director General to the Ninety seventh Session of the WHO Executive Board (“The Feasibility of an International Instrument for Tobacco Control” (EB97/ INF.DOC.4)). During that same session, the Executive Board adopted Resolution EB97.R8, "International framework convention for tobacco control." Later that year, the Forty ninth Session of the WHA adopted Resolution WHA49.17, "International framework convention for tobacco control", requesting the Director General to initiate the development of a Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. As a result of this resolution, WHO's first treaty making enterprise was formally launched. In 1998 newly elected WHO Director General, Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland made global tobacco control a priority through the establishment of a Cabinet Project, the Tobacco Free Initiative, to focus international attention, resources and action upon the global tobacco epidemic. New multisectoral partnerships reflecting the nature of the action were developed. More importantly, Dr Brundtland worked with Member States to secure a negotiating mandate for the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and set about the task of mobilizing public and political opinion in favour of global rules for tobacco control. In May 1999 the Fifty second World Health Assembly paved the way for multilateral negotiations on the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and possible related protocols. Resolution WHA52.18 established two bodies to draft the framework convention, to complete negotiations and to submit the final text for consideration by the Fifty sixth World Health Assembly. These two bodies included a technical working group to prepare the proposed draft elements of the Framework Convention; and an intergovernmental negotiating body to draft and negotiate the proposed Framework Convention and possible related protocols. Both bodies were open to all Member States and regional economic integration organizations to which their Member States had transferred competence over matters related to tobacco control. The working group held two sessions in Geneva (25 29 October 1999 and 27 29 March 2000). Its output was a document with provisional texts of proposed draft elements for the Framework Convention, submitted to the Fifty third World Health Assembly with the comments of the working group1. In Resolution WHA53.16, the Health Assembly called upon the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body to commence negotiations with an initial focus 33 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control on the draft Framework Convention without prejudice to future discussions on possible protocols, to report progress to the Fifty fourth World Health Assembly, and to examine the question of extended participation by nongovernmental organizations as observers The first session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (Geneva, 16 21 October 2000) was preceded by a public hearing on issues surrounding the Framework Convention. The Director General convened this hearing in order to provide a forum for the public health community, the tobacco industry and farmers’ groups to submit their case; records of the proceedings were made available to the Negotiating Body and, through the WHO web site, to the public. At the first session, Ambassador Celso Amorim of Brazil was elected as Chair, and a bureau was established with Vice Chairs from Australia, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, South Africa, Turkey and the United States of America. The provisional texts of the proposed draft elements for a WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 2, which had been prepared by the working group, were accepted as a sound basis for initiating negotiations. Subsequently, Ambassador Amorim prepared a Chair’s text of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 3; this first draft was released in January 2001 as a basis for further negotiations at the second session. A report on participation of nongovernmental organizations in the work of the Negotiating Body was presented to the Executive Board at its 107th session in January 20014. In accordance with the provisions of decision EB107(2) of the Executive Board, the Chairman of the Board acting jointly with the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Non Governmental Organizations admitted two nongovernmental organizations, the International Nongovernmental Coalition Against Tobacco and Infact, into official relations with WHO as of 26 April 20015. In further preparation for the second session of the Negotiating Body, regional intersessional consultations were convened in most regions and subregions. Additional regional and subregional intersessional consultations took place in preparation for each of the subsequent sessions of the Negotiating Body. At the second session of the Negotiating Body (Geneva, 30 April 5 May 2001), responsibility for consideration of the proposed draft elements was divided between three working groups. The principal output was the set of three Co Chairs’ working papers, an inventory of textual proposals made at the session merged with the Chair’s original text. These working papers became the rolling draft text of the Framework Convention. At the third session (Geneva, 22 28 November 2001), two working groups issued revised texts and Working Group One later drafted a text. These documents were used to further negotiations during the fourth session. Having taken over as Permanent Representative of Brazil in Geneva in replacement of the 34 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control Intergovernmental Negotiating Body on the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control during its fourth session (Geneva, 18 23 March 2002). It was agreed that Ambassador Seixas Corrêa should prepare a new Chair’s text, which would form the basis of negotiations during the fifth session of the Negotiating Body (14 25 October 2002). The text was released in July 2002. An international technical conference on illicit trade in tobacco products was hosted by the United States of America at the United Nations Headquarters in New York (30 July 1 August 2002) The first four sessions of the Negotiating Body had considered numerous textual alternatives. Concerted deliberations at the fifth session narrowed the options, resulting in more focused negotiations. After a first reading, in plenary, of the new Chair’s text, six issues were identified and discussed in open ended informal meetings: advertising, promotion and sponsorship; financial resources; illicit trade in tobacco products; liability and compensation; packaging and labelling; and trade and health. Informal groups also held discussions on legal, institutional and procedural issues and use of terms. Substantial advances in the negotiations were made and consensus was reached in several areas. On the basis of the outputs of the informal sessions and the intersessional consultations with various delegations and groups of delegations, Ambassador Seixas Corrêa issued a revised Chair’s text of a Framework Convention on Tobacco Control on 15 January 2003. The sixth and final session of the Negotiating Body ran from 17 February 1 March 2003. The negotiations were intense and broad ranging. Two important issues, advertising, promotion and sponsorship and financial resources, were discussed in two informal groups. At the final plenary meeting, the Negotiating Body agreed to transmit the text to the Fifty sixth World Health Assembly for consideration for adoption in accordance with Article 19 of the Constitution. It also agreed that the discussion of protocols should be postponed until that Health Assembly, at which there would be time for consideration of the matter. At its final plenary meeting, the Negotiating Body agreed that the Chair of the Negotiating Body should draft a resolution recommending adoption of the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control by the Health Assembly6. The final draft of the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 7 was thus submitted to the Health Assembly for consideration for adoption, pursuant to Resolution WHA52.18. On 21 May 2003, the 56th World Health Assembly, unanimously adopted the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control8. The Convention was opened for signature, for a period of one year, from 16 June 2003 to 22 June 2003 at WHO headquarters in Geneva and thereafter at United Nations Headquarters in New York, from 30 June 2003 to 29 June 2004. The WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control is a landmark for the future of global public health and has major implications for WHO’s health goals. The conclusion of the negotiating process and the unanimous adoption of the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, in full accordance with Health Assembly resolutions, represents a milestone 35 WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control for the promotion of public health and provides new legal dimensions for international health cooperation. 1 Document A53/12. 2 Document A/FCTC/INB1/2. 3 Document A/FCTC/INB2/2. 4 Document EB107/19. 5 Document A/FCTC/INB2/6 Add.1. 6 This draft resolution is contained in document A56/8/REV.1. 7 See document A56/8, Annex. 8 WHO Document WHA56.1 36 The WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control was developed in response to the globalization of the tobacco epidemic. The spread of the tobacco epidemic is facilitated by a variety of complex factors with cross border effects, including trade liberalization, foreign direct investment, and other activities such as global marketing, transnational tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship, and the international movement of contraband and counterfeit cigarettes. The WHO FCTC is an evidence based treaty that reafﬁ rms the right of all people to the highest standard of health. WHO FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON TOBACCO CONTROL Convention Secretariat WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control World Health Organization Avenue Appia 20, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland Tel: +41 22 791 50 43 Fax: +41 22 791 58 30 Email: fctcsecretariat@who.int Web: www.who.int/fctc 789241 591010 fctc_cover_traité15_English.indd 1 fctc_cover_traité15_English.indd 1 2010 02 02 09:22:48 2010 02 02 09:22:48 Foreword PART 1 Introduction Why this Analysis? From Data to Action PART 2 Key Findings PART 3 Recommendations Strategic Recommendations for NGOs Technical Recommendations for NGOs Recommendations for International Geneva PART 4 Cyber Threats to NGOs: Analysis Overarching Threat Landscape Types of Threat Actors Specific Threats and Vulnerabilities Actual Incidents Resilience and Incident Response Organizational Readiness: Human Resources Financial Capacity Processes Hosting Environment and Data Location Technical Analysis 5 6 6 8 10 10 12 12 12 12 14 17 17 17 18 19 21 22 22 22 24 24 26 27 Tackling the Threat Account and Software Management Backup Procedures Other Active Cybersecurity Measures Training 2 28 29 30 31 33 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Case Studies Case Study #1: Ransomware Attack on an NGO Case Study #2: Attack on an NGO Website Case Study #3: Responding to a Man in the Middle cyberattack Appendix A: Detailed recommendations Organizational recommendations Technical Recommendations Basic Cybersecurity Measures: Enhanced Cybersecurity Measures: Project scope and participation of NGOs Limitations 35 35 35 39 43 48 48 48 50 50 51 52 52 54 55 60 PART 5 Appendices Appendix B: Methodological considerations Appendix C: Glossary References 3 In a world in crisis, protecting NGOs is an emergency. CyberPeace Institute | 2023 ey “as Foreword Stéphane Duguin, Chief Executive Officer, CyberPeace Institute Despite 25 years spent collecting evidence at crime scenes, gathering testimonies, tracking down perpetrators of crimes and being confronted with the worst that the human mind can imagine, I am still stunned by criminals lack of shame. Before becoming Chief Executive Officer of the CyberPeace Institute, I admit I never looked into the situation of non governmental organizations (NGOs), and did not understand the precarity within which they operate in cyberspace. These last few years have introduced me to a shocking reality, that those who are first on the front line of armed conflicts, in natural disasters and climate crises, are targets, and often victims of cyberattacks. These are attacks against those who invest their hearts, expertise and time to the provision of essential services to people in all parts of the world from access to drinking water, assistance to refugees, to safeguarding children. This report bears witness to the cyber reality of NGOs, and supports a conviction: I firmly believe that we can all do more to support NGOs. Civil society, public authorities, philanthropies, academia, media, can collectively enable the urgent support that NGOs need and deserve. This report is published on the fourth anniversary of the founding of the CyberPeace Institute. Since our creation, we have been providing free cybersecurity support to those who need it most, analysing the threat landscape and advocating for responsible behavior in cyberspace. This report is a further contribution to this work, and another building block in the construction of collective action to protect those the NGOs who help to protect us. 5 CyberPeace Analytical Report Part 1 Introduction In the heart of International Geneva, a diverse ecosystem thrives, housing 38 international organizations (IOs), 432 non governmental organizations (NGOs), and several hundred associations active at an international level, all united by a shared mission: to make the world a place of greater humanity, peace and justice. NGOs are the unsung heroes, responding in armed conflicts, natural disasters, and humanitarian crises, championing human rights, and advancing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Like many other organizations, NGOs heavily rely on technology, which is critical for projecting their activities globally in real time. Yet, in today’s digital landscape, this reality brings its own set of challenges. While fighting for the greater good, NGOs must battle against all forms of cyberattacks, ranging from espionage and ransomware to fraud and disinformation. On one side, they are targeted by various threat actors criminal groups, state actors, terrorist groups or hacktivists seeking to disrupt their work, compromise data, and tarnish their reputation. On the other, they do not possess the human or financial resources to protect themselves. In Geneva, the CyberPeace Institute safeguards these heroes. Our cybersecurity services for NGOs include threat landscape mapping, volunteer led consulting, alert notifications, and providing policy recommendations to donors and public/private decision makers. All these services are free and tailored to the NGOs’ operational reality. With the leadership and support of the Republic and Canton of Geneva, this report aims to provide actionable recommendations to build capacities and resilience to mitigate cyber risks. It provides insights on the organizational readiness of NGOs to prevent, respond to and recover from cyberattacks. Using data, including primary data from surveys and interviews, the Report looks at the threats NGOs face, the vulnerabilities they are exposed to, and examines their preparedness to mitigate these challenges. Its ambition is to reinforce NGOs’ resilience in a sustainable manner, and for them to become the primary actors of their cybersecurity. This report builds on technical analysis conducted by our cyber analysts and a comprehensive survey with 27 Geneva based NGOs. 6 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 The sample size of 27 NGOs allowed for a detailed examination of each participating NGO, providing an understanding of their unique contexts, challenges, and practices. This depth of analysis can yield nuanced insights that may be obscured in larger samples. These organizations have been selected because they embody the diversity of Geneva NGOs: some conduct their activities in Geneva whilst others operate across the world. Some are small and under financed, others are well established. They operate in sectors including healthcare, justice, human rights, peace and education and humanitarian relief. Together, these NGOs bring vital aid and services to tens of millions of beneficiaries. If you are an NGO looking for help with your cybersecurity, we encourage you to reach out to us. We are here to support and protect your vital work in our increasingly digital world. The CyberPeace Institute is an independent and neutral non governmental organisation (NGO) that strives to reduce the frequency, impact, and scale of cyberattacks, to hold actors accountable for the harm they cause, and to assist vulnerable communities. The Institute is based in Geneva, works in close collaboration with relevant partners to reduce the harm from cyberattacks on people’s lives worldwide, and provide assistance. By analysing cyberattacks, it exposes their societal impact, the ways that international laws and norms are being violated, and advances responsible behaviour to enforce cyberpeace At the heart of the Institute’s efforts is the recognition that cyberspace is about people. It supports providers of essential services to the most vulnerable members of society, ultimately benefiting us all. 7 CyberPeace Analytical Report Why this Analysis? From Data to Action The aim of this analysis project is to increase understanding of the cyber threat landscape affecting NGOs and aims to provide actionable recommendations. These recommendations address the following areas: 1. How NGOs can better defend and protect themselves from cyberattacks and their associated impact and harm. A separate technical report is also provided to NGOs with more specificities on technical findings from this project. 2. How donors, policymakers, and companies can contribute to safeguarding NGOs in the face of cyber threats. Although the focus of the current report is on Geneva based organizations, this methodology will be replicated in other contexts and serve as a blueprint for future reports on cyber threats against NGOs. This report is part of the CyberPeace Institute’s broader mission, offering free cybersecurity services to NGOs which includes: Mapping the threat landscape for NGOs. Delivering actionable, free cybersecurity services to NGOs (CyberPeace Builders program1). Producing threat intelligence and automatically alerting NGOs about suspicious cyber activity. Building capacity amongst donors cybersecurity risks of NGOs. to understand the Providing data driven evidence to regulators. Acknowledgements and assistance The CyberPeace Institute acknowledges and thanks the important contributions from the NGOs that participated in this project. These NGOs from International Geneva conduct their activities across a range of sectors, including humanitarian, health, justice, human rights, peace and education. They bring vital assistance and services to tens of millions of beneficiaries across the globe. These NGOs operate internationally across various regions, particularly Europe, Africa, the 8 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Middle East and Asia. A number of the organizations also operate in North America, Oceania, Latin America and the Caribbean. The analysis, findings and conclusions of this report have been developed by the analysts and other experts of the CyberPeace Institute. They have been shared with the NGOs who participated in the project but they have not been requested to endorse them. NGOs concerned by or encountering any of the issues detailed in this report can contact the Institute for advice and support through its CyberPeace Builders program. The CyberPeace Builders1 is composed of regional advisors and experts working and/or volunteering for the CyberPeace Institute, and managing a network of corporate volunteers from local and international companies developed specifically to support NGOs. This program helps NGOs by providing them with pre incident, post incident and support services to build their cyber resilience. NGOs can build their resilience by accessing tailored assistance, such as awareness training, dark web monitoring, phishing simulations and website vulnerability scanning. 9 CyberPeace Analytical Report Part 2 Key Findings Key Finding 1 NGOs in International Geneva are targeted by cyberattacks. 41% of NGOs report having been victim of a cyberattack within the past three years. All NGOs that have experienced attacks report that these were not isolated events. The frequency of these incidents varies, with some NGOs facing incidents on a daily basis and others encountering them on a monthly or annual basis. 70% of NGOs either don’t think, or aren't sure whether, they have an adequate level of resilience to recover from a disruptive cyberattack. Key Finding 2 NGOs in International Geneva understand their exposure to cyber risks, but lack the support needed to implement mature cybersecurity strategies. NGOs, unlike entities recognized as critical infrastructure, lack specific designation as a sector for particular protections in cyberspace. Funding for NGOs is generally earmarked for specific projects, often leaving cybersecurity without dedicated financial support. 33% of NGOs report having no Information Technology (IT) support or technical expertise, and 56% of NGOs report not having a budget allocated for their cybersecurity needs. While NGOs generally recognize a variety of potential threats, such as social engineering, ransomware, and other malware, only 4% have an actionable cybersecurity policy. 85% of NGOs recognize the importance of staff awareness in cybersecurity, yet only 52% provide regular cybersecurity awareness training to their personnel. 10 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Key Finding 3 NGOs in International Geneva face challenges reconciling their operational models with the rapidly changing operational landscape and the needs for cybersecurity. NGOs are confronted with a rapidly changing landscape of regulation, norms and laws related to the use of technology and obligations in the event of cyberattacks. For instance, data protection obligations in the case of a data breach. Freely available cybersecurity tools accessible to NGOs are not tailored to their specific operating and business models. Access to and awareness of these tools alone does not equate to sustainable cybersecurity. NGOs require more than tools and knowledge, they also require a cybersecurity workforce (people and skills). Whilst NGOs have much more progress to make in their cybersecurity capabilities and capacities, acknowledging the very real threats posed to them and developing cybersecurity practices suggests concrete actions can be taken, paving the way for a more optimistic future. 11 Os eace Poco Part 3 Recommendations Strategic Recommendations for NGOs NGOs should follow guidance and advice provided by the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC). The NCSC website provides information and advice on topics including, cyberthreats and incidents, technology considerations, awareness raising and prevention. NGOs can also use the website to report cybersecurity incidents and vulnerabilities. NGOs should report cyber incidents to the relevant Swiss law enforcement agency and to the NCSC. NGOs should join the CyberPeace Builders to benefit from actionable and free cybersecurity resources, including skilled experts, adapted technology, and support in developing their digitization strategy. Technical Recommendations for NGOs The CyberPeace Builders provides free cybersecurity support to NGOs, including for the following recommendations: NGOs should organize simulations to test their cybersecurity policies and practices. NGOs should also regularly run security awareness and training programs for all staff members, including board members and senior leadership teams. Specialized training on social engineering attacks, such as phishing exercises, should also be conducted. NGOs should also conduct vulnerability scans of their digital assets and 12 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 ensure they follow the latest security recommendations. NGOs should maintain official documents outlining their cybersecurity policies and procedures, with a particular emphasis on software management. Regularly updating software, removing unsupported or unused software, and disabling unnecessary user accounts should be documented as best practices. NGOs should establish clear processes and procedures for the identification and implementation of cybersecurity tools. This includes Multi Factor Authentication (MFA), Next Generation Anti Virus (NGAV) software, firewalls, password managers, Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), and Data Loss Prevention (DLP) systems. NGOs should develop robust backup procedures to mitigate the impact of cyberattacks, infrastructure failures, outages, or unexpected events. These procedures should be documented and regularly tested. To protect their web services effectively, NGOs should document processes for safeguarding backend admin interfaces with reverse proxy masking IP addresses and secure query processing. Additionally, they should implement Domain Name System (DNS) and network proxy solutions offering DDoS protection and certificate issuers for website protection. NGOs should provide clear guidance to their users on checking whether their private and professional email accounts have appeared in known data breaches. They should also establish documented procedures to follow in the event of a breach. NGOs should schedule regular security audits conducted by external third party experts, documenting the audit process and results. NGOs should establish documented naming conventions with consistent rules for account naming, facilitating cybersecurity management. NGOs should document processes for the regular review and verification of security for external accounts. To reduce security risks, NGOs should maintain official documents outlining procedures for restricting administrative privileges to a minimal number of trusted users. NGOs should document security measures that ensure all ports are secured with SSL encryption to prevent unauthorized users from intercepting data. 13 CyberPeace Analytical Report NGOs should follow documented best practices for email security, including DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) and Domain based Message Authentication, Reporting and Conformance (DMARC) Recommendations for the International Geneva While the key findings shed light on the critical challenges that NGOs in International Geneva face in the realm of cybersecurity, the following recommendations provide a concrete roadmap for action. These recommendations are structured according to a cyber capacity building framework developed by the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR)2, covering five key pillars: official documents, processes and structures, partnerships and networks, people and skills, and technology. Official Documents Related to Cybersecurity Matters: NGOs should be recognized as stakeholders with specific needs to which host authorities pay particular attention. Given the role of NGOs, promoting their cybersecurity should be integrated strongly into policies. Geneva based NGOs should develop and implement cybersecurity governance policies and practices, including a cybersecurity policy, an incident response plan, and an asset inventory. The CyberPeace Institute, as a local partner, commits to help them do that. The CyberPeace Institute and its academic partners should enhance their efforts to document, track, and analyze cyberattacks against NGOs within the Geneva ecosystem and any subsequent accountability measures taken, including the prosecution of perpetrators. Processes and Structures: Swiss Public authorities should recognize the specific needs of NGOs. In cases involving ransomware, investigations into the financial flow stemming from extortion schemes should be conducted to hinder the activities of threat actors. Public authorities should actively promote the position discouraging the payment of ransom, emphasizing that it directly finances organized crime and encourages further cyberattacks. • Swiss Public authorities, together with the National Cyber Security Center (NCSC), should actively promote transparent reporting on cyberattacks against NGOs to inform policy making. Robust 14 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 safeguards should be in place to protect the confidentiality and integrity of this information Partnerships and networks: Cybersecurity companies based in Geneva, and private companies who employ cybersecurity professionals, should join the CyberPeace Builders programme to volunteer their expertise to help Geneva based NGOs. Private companies can benefit from the CyberPeace Builders program by showcasing social responsibility and fostering staff skill development in real world scenarios. These collaborations also strengthen cross sector relationships, offering insights into NGO cybersecurity challenges and improving companies' ability to address evolving threats. NGOs would benefit from a better understanging of the threat they are facing. Swiss public authorities could actively facilitate the study of existing and potential cyber threats faced by NGOs. Collaborative initiatives with academia and civil society organizations can be instrumental in building knowledge about cyberattacks and their impact on NGOs. The local ecosystem should engage with media organizations reporting on cyberattacks to highlight the human impact these attacks have on NGOs and the beneficiaries they serve. People and Skills: Resources should continue to be allocated to enhance the knowledge and expertise related to cybersecurity within NGOs. This includes setting up cyber clinics to help NGOs in developing in house capabilities through training, or outsourcing to external providers when necessary. Swiss public authorities and academics can play a particular role in this regard. Technology: Local corporations and civil society in the Geneva ecosystem should collaborate to share in a secure manner threat information about attacks against NGOs and the vulnerabilities that threat actors exploit with ease. The CyberPeace Institute and its partners should continue to develop free cybersecurity products for NGOs, and develop partnerships with Geneva based private companies to offer their solutions for free to local NGOs. 15 CyberPeace Analytical Report 16 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Part 4 Cyber Threats on NGOs : Analysis Overarching Threat Landscape For the past years, NGOs have been undergoing a rapid digital transformation which has increased their risks of cyberattacks. The technologies that allow their action to be more effective are being exploited by malicious actors who steal funds, exfiltrate data, including highly sensitive data on people, or disrupt the organizations’ ability to operate. Additionally, there is the risk that cyberattacks and operations could exacerbate humanitarian needs. For example, targeting essential infrastructure could disrupt the provision of critical services including power supplies, healthcare and clean water, which are essential for the civilian population. However, NGOs often lack cybersecurity capabilities to both understand their threat landscape and to put in place adequate measures to prevent, respond to and recover from cyberattacks. They may not have the resources and expertise to properly secure their ICT infrastructure and digital assets or to develop an adequate incident response system that could minimize the impacts of cyberattacks. Types of Cyberattack Destructive attacks designed to cause damage to systems and deletion of data. Disruptive attacks that organizations and systems. interrupt the functioning of Data weaponization attacks leading to the theft or exfiltration of data or the acquisition of data for espionage, surveillance or intelligence. Disinformation attacks leading to the spread and circulation of false and/or malicious information. 17 ¥ y f CyberPeace Analytical Report Types of Threat Actors Cyber threat actors, also known as malicious actors, are individuals and/or groups that intentionally cause harm to digital networks, systems and/or devices. Cyber incidents are carried out by a range of different threat actors including: mam Nation state actors: Threat actors that are part of a state apparatus. mu==xa +4 State sponsored threat actors: Threat actors which conduct cyber operations on behalf of a state’s interests, including geopolitical objectives. The state may delegate authority for an actor to act on its behalf, or orchestrate an actor to act in pursuit of state goals, including by the provision of ideation or material support. Advanced Persistent Threat actors (APTs) are often included within the realm of state sponsored threat actors due to the sophistication of their malicious cyber activities. “Proxies” are intermediaries that are available to, detached from, but mobilised by, a beneficiary which may be a state to carry out cyber activities in pursuance of its interests Hacktivist collectives: Threat actors conducting malicious cyber operations primarily hacking to bring attention to a cause. These threat actors are politically, socially, or ideologically motivated. wea 396 Cyber criminals: Individuals or groups of people who use technology with malicious intent to harm or otherwise obstruct activities on digital systems or networks. mam Cyber terrorists: Threat actors belonging to, or affiliated with, a terrorist organization, who conduct malicious cyber operations including threats of violence to support that organization’s objectives or activities. maa Insider threats: Insider threat actors are individuals who use their authorized access to an organization, intentionally or unintentionally, to do harm to the 18 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 organization. No matter the intent, there is often a compromise to the confidentiality, availability and/or integrity of the organization’s network, systems or data. Competitors: Threat actors conducting malicious cyber activities against a competitor to gain advantage or cause reputational harm. ma Individuals: Threat actors that attack computer and information systems primarily for fun or to advance their own skills (thrill seekers), or for their own personal gain. Specific Threats and Vulnerabilities The NGOs participating in the analysis were asked to identify the main cyberattacks/threats to their organization, the malicious actors behind these attacks, and any vulnerabilities that pose a serious risk to their organizations' cybersecurity. The results demonstrate a general awareness on the variety of potential threats and risks NGOs might encounter, as illustrated below. 93% of NGOs identified cybercriminals as a significant threat actor, demonstrating widespread concerns about potential criminal targeting. Hacktivists and nation state actors were jointly perceived as the next tier of threat actors, with 30% of NGOs indicating concern over the potential threat. Other significant threat actors included, ‘thrill seekers’, and terrorist groups. Significant Threat Actors (as perceived by NGOs) 19 CyberPeace Analytical Report The NGOs were asked to identify the techniques/type of threat they perceive as posing a significant threat. Findings focused particularly on different types of disruptive attacks: 85% consider social engineering to be a significant threat. 41% consider online influence operations as an significant threat. NGOs Threat Perception Top 5 Cyberattack Types SOCIAL ENGINEERING 85% RANSOMWARE 70% OTHER MALWARE 56% SPYWARE 48% ONLINE INFLUENCE Ta OPERATIONS 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% The NGOs were asked to provide their insights into what they perceive to be the main risk factors for their organizations. The findings were that: 85% think that their staff pose a significant risk. 52% identified unpatched software, systems and weak credentials as significant risks. Significant Vulnerability Risks (as percieved by NGOs) UNPATCHED | COMPROMISED 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 20 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Besides demonstrating a general awareness level amongst the NGOs participating in the current analysis, these figures indicate that cybersecurity has become a serious concern for NGOs. Moreover, these concerns reflect findings detailed by the Swiss National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), which details ransomware gateways as including poorly secured systems and emails with attachments.3 This is also underscored by the UK National Cyber Security Centre in their Annual Review 2021, where it was observed that threat actors were increasingly exploiting vulnerabilities in virtual private networks (VPNs), unpatched software and using phishing emails specifically to deliver ransomware.4 Actual Incidents In general, information about actual cyber incidents is rarely made public, thus the report survey asked NGOs if they had been the victim of a cyberattack. The findings in this regard are that: 41% of NGOs report that they have been the victim of a cyberattack within the past three years. The most prolific attacks include social engineering (e.g. phishing), ransomware, Denial of Service Attacks (DDoS) and other malware. Other reported attacks included CEO fraud, website impersonation, spyware, Man in the Middle (MITM) and brute force attacks. Of those that had experienced cyber incidents, 100% reported that these attacks were not isolated events, with some experiencing cybersecurity incidents daily while others face them on a monthly or annual basis. The attacks led to a range of adverse impacts on the NGOs, including financial losses, compromised financial data, disruptions to external engagements, disruptions to staff activities and to staff time, and the necessity to revise procedures. In order to gain a better understanding of the actual impact of cyberattacks, three case studies are presented later in this report. The case studies are based on interviews with three of the surveyed NGOs and look into the specific circumstances of the cyberattacks they experienced. These case studies provide valuable insights into the threat landscape faced by NGOs and the need for effective responses. 21 CyberPeace Analytical Report Resilience and Incident Response Findings show that 70% of NGOs don’t think, or aren’t sure whether, they have an adequate level of resilience to recover from a disruptive cyberattack. When asked about their capacity to monitor cyber risks and respond to incidents: 70% of NGOs do not have any incident response, analysis or investigative in house capabilities in the case of a cyberattack. 63% of NGOs do not monitor the clear or dark web for leaked credentials or compromised accounts/infrastructure. 37% of NGOs do not believe they have the capability, or are uncertain about their capacity, to detect potential security incidents or suspicious activity. 15% of NGOs indicated that they never conduct security assessments or audits of their cybersecurity infrastructure. 33% of NGOs indicated that they have acquired, or plan to acquire cyber insurance Organizational Readiness Human Resources The report survey aimed to gauge the distribution of different IT and cybersecurity expertise roles (people and skills) within the organizations. This is crucial for understanding the capacities and capabilities of the NGOs in managing and mitigating cyber threats. NGOs were asked to identify which of the following roles existed within their organization: IT support; systems administrator; data protection officer; cyber security expert; information security officer; other. The results demonstrate a range of cybersecurity and IT expertise across the surveyed NGOs. 33% of NGOs overall report having no IT support or technical expertise. 15% of NGOs have cybersecurity experts. 22 IT Support is the most commonly reported expertise, identified in 59% of NGOs, indicating at least a foundational level of IT capability. System administrator expertise is reported by 41% of NGOs, demonstrating a structure in their approach to IT and cybersecurity. 26% of NGOs have a data protection officer in their organization. Only 15% of NGOs have cybersecurity experts, and 11% of NGOs have an information security officer. Organisational readiness (Human Resources) ITSUPPORT I SYSTEM ADMINISTRATOR Ml NONE o DATA PROTECTION OFFICER I CYBERSECURITY EXPERT B INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER Organizations lacking such support are likely to have considerable difficulty managing their cybersecurity posture, and mitigating or responding to cybersecurity incidents. Without a dedicated cybersecurity team, NGOs may struggle to conduct regular risk assessments, identify potential weaknesses in their systems, and implement robust security measures. Moreover, the absence of IT and cybersecurity experts hampers the organization's ability to stay abreast of evolving threats and industry best practices. In the event of a cybersecurity incident, such as a data breach or a ransomware attack, the absence of specialized personnel can exacerbate the impact, leading to prolonged downtime, data loss, and reputational damage. IT and cybersecurity professionals play a crucial role in proactively implementing preventative measures, monitoring for anomalies, and responding promptly to mitigate the effects of an attack. NGOs without cybersecurity staff face a higher risk of falling victim to cyber threats and may struggle to recover without the necessary expertise to navigate the complexities of the digital landscape. 23 CyberPeace Analytical Report Reviewing the results by organizational size, 88% of NGOs, which are classified as micro size enterprises by the OECD (defined as businesses with fewer than 10 employees), report having no dedicated IT or cybersecurity expertise. In contrast, larger organizations tend to possess broader expertise, suggesting a relationship between organization size and technical capability. However, one organization within the medium sized enterprise category, which the OECD defines as having between 50 and 249 employees, also reports having no IT support or cybersecurity expertise, which represents a significant exposure given the size of the organization. This emphasises that a shortage of expert staff, whether due to budgetary constraints or lack of recognition of the necessity for such expertise, is not confined solely to smaller organizations Financial Capacity Investing in cybersecurity ensures that an NGO can keep its systems and software up to date, by implementing the latest security measures to defend against evolving cyber risks. Allocating financial resources to enable the necessary people, skills, policies, processes, and tools in cybersecurity is an investment in safeguarding the organization's confidentiality, availability and integrity. In particular, ensuring operational resilience, and upholding the trust of beneficiaries, staff, donors and partners. 56% of NGOs report not having a budget allocated for their cybersecurity needs, which is consistent with the low levels of technical and cybersecurity capacities found in many of the surveyed organizations. Processes Developing robust cybersecurity processes is a crucial step towards protecting sensitive data, preparing for and defending against evolving threats, and upholding the trust of different stakeholders. Only 4% of NGOs report currently having a cybersecurity policy. A cybersecurity policy outlines how an organization safeguards itself against and responds to cyber threats. It serves as a vital framework that encompasses various aspects of cybersecurity, including systems access control, incident response, inventory procedures, 24 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 password management and data protection. An effective policy can help organizations to comply with regulatory requirements and reduce their risk of falling victim to cyberattacks. Components of such a policy are being implemented to a varying degree across the organizations. For example, 48% of NGOs indicate the presence of a password policy, 63% of NGOs have established a data protection policy and 30% of NGOs report having an information systems access control policy. 78% of NGOs report that they do not have an incident response plan (IRP). 26% of NGOs report that they do not keep an inventory of physical ICT assets. The foundational security of any organization's cybersecurity environment relies on knowing what assets they own and manage, what their status is, where they are located, and who is responsible for them. Does your organization MNO] =o YES) MN INPROGRESS mT DON’T KNOW have a cybersecurity policy? have an information systems access control in place? have a data protection policy? have a communication strategy in case of a cyberattack? have an incident response plan? have a password policy in place ? have an inventory for physical devices? 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 25 CyberPeace Analytical Report Hosting Environment and Data Location Cloud based and on premise hosting are both ways to store and manage digital resources including data, websites and emails. On premise hosting involves storing, controlling and maintaining servers within an organization’s own physical infrastructure. For example, an organization may decide to deploy a mail server within their own network environment. Cloud based solutions instead rely on the use of external infrastructure belonging to a third party. For example, an organization may use a cloud based email management solution that does not require them to update, manage or maintain the mail server. On premise hosting is typically less cost effective and scalable than cloud based hosting, but can provide higher levels of control and security if configured and maintained according to best practice recommendations. Taking these factors into consideration, organizations may decide to use one, or a combination (hybrid) of the two solutions, in order to cater to their specific requirements. Whether using on premise, hybrid or cloud storage solutions, NGOs must ensure that access control is properly configured, activity is logged and user accounts are managed to mitigate unauthorized access to sensitive data. The report survey findings show that: 92% of NGOs host sensitive data either in the cloud (44%), or in a mixture of cloud based and on premise solutions (48%). 82% of NGOs use a cloud based email server. 89% of NGOs use external hosting for their main domain/website. Among external domain/website hosting users, 42% of NGOs opt for a shared hosting solution, 13% of NGOs have dedicated hosting and 4% use a combination of both. The remaining organizations were unable to confirm which type of external domain/website hosting they use. It is important to note that the global distribution of an organization’s assets such as web servers, may not be limited to the country in which an organization is physically located. Organizations may choose to use servers hosted at data centres in various countries depending on factors such as costs, latency, service providers, the nature of data they are handling, regulations and service delivery requirements. 26 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Organizations may also rely on the distributed infrastructure of parent and partner organizations, or require temporary deployments of networking devices and servers for remote satellite offices. Understanding where an organization’s internet facing assets are located is fundamental for the successful implementation of any organizational security setup. Knowing the location of assets can also provide insights into how organizations may be exposed to certain types of other risks, for instance, those stemming from geopolitical and geographical factors. For example, if servers are hosted in countries engaged in an armed conflict, prone to natural disasters or with power supply constraints, there may be additional controls and processes required to mitigate potential server downtime. Sensitive Data Storage Location Account and Software Management Organizations can immediately mitigate threats by keeping key systems and software updated, removing software that is no longer used or supported, and by removing/disabling unnecessary user accounts. 22% of NGOs do not update key software. 52% of NGOs do not require IT approval for software installations. 41% of NGOs do not remove software if it is no longer supported. 96% of NGOs report that they remove or disable unnecessary user accounts. Managing user accounts is a fundamental aspect of maintaining a secure digital environment. By regularly reviewing and eliminating unnecessary accounts, NGOs demonstrate a proactive approach to reducing the attack surface and minimizing potential vulnerabilities. Unused or outdated accounts can become vectors for unauthorized access, making them potential targets for malicious actors. Removing or disabling these accounts helps organizations prevent unauthorized access, data breaches, and other security incidents. This practice aligns with the principle of least privilege, ensuring that individuals 29 CyberPeace Analytical Report have only the necessary access rights for their roles. Overall, the high percentage of NGOs engaging in this security measure reflects a conscious effort to enhance their cybersecurity posture, safeguard sensitive information, and mitigate the risk of unauthorized access or exploitation of their systems. Backup Procedures By regularly keeping data backed up in a safe environment, organizations have the ability to restore systems to a working condition in the event of infrastructure failure or disruptions. Examples of common scenarios that can lead to such a failure include systems and devices failing or crashing, cyberattacks (e.g. ransomware or DDoS attacks), and natural disasters (e.g. floods, fires and earthquakes). Even if the organization is not directly affected by these events, it may still experience downtime if its cloud or managed service provider is affected.5 82% of NGOs indicated they have a regular backup procedure in place. While regular backup procedures are essential for protecting data, organizations also need to have a plan for restoring their data in 30 30 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 the event of an incident, such as a data breach or other emergency. Disaster Recovery (DR) exercises can help organizations to assess and refine their backup plans during simulated scenarios. Running such exercises can improve the reliability and functionality of backup plans and enhance organizational preparedness in the event of an actual disaster. NIST Special Publication 800 846 is a guide on testing, training, and exercise programs for IT plans and capabilities. The publication guides organizations through creating and evaluating training, testing and exercise events with the objective of helping personnel prepare for adverse situations involving IT. This guide is a valuable resource for organizations of all sizes looking to improve their disaster recovery preparedness Other Active Cybersecurity Measures Anti virus solutions can detect, contain and remove potentially malicious applications from computers in an environment. Next Generation Endpoint protection (NGAV) anti virus is particularly important, as it monitors for behavioural indicators commonly associated with active malware infections. NGAV provides users with enhanced protection within their organizational environment, ensuring safety even when networked devices are compromised and malicious entities attempt to propagate across the networks. of NGOs report either not having next generation anti virus protection software on all their organization’s devices or are uncertain about its use. Firewalls are virtual or physical devices/programs that control the flow of network traffic between networks or hosts to employ differing levels of protection.7 They can serve as an important layer of security for organizations, whatever their size, protecting networks against unauthorized access. Every operating system, whether it’s Windows, Mac OS or Linux, comes with its own built in firewall, and it’s crucial to have it activated. Additionally, it is crucial to have a cloud based Web Application Firewall (WAF) in place to protect web services. of NGOs report they either lack an active firewall on all their organization’s devices or are uncertain regarding their usage. 31 CyberPeace Analytical Report £2 Password managers help users generate and store multiple passwords for their online accounts. Password managers encrypt this information in a secure ‘vault’, only accessible to those with rights access. 37% of NGOs report either not using a password manager, or are uncertain about its use. D ey QL Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) create a secure tunnel that can access internal resources, safeguarding online activities by encrypting data and providing a level of anonymity by masking an organization’s IP address. • 19% of NGOs report that VPN use is partially enforced. of NGOs report that their organizations either do not enforce the use of a Virtual Private Network (VPN), or are uncertain about its use. Multi Factor Authentication (MFA) is a security process that requires using two or more different factors for authentication and can be an effective method to prevent password and identity theft. 7% of NGOs report that they use MFA partially across their key platforms. 33% report either not having MFA activated across key platforms used in their organization’s daily work, or are uncertain about its use. Data Loss Prevention (DLP) is a security solution that protects sensitive data from unauthorized sharing, transfer, or use. DLP can help organizations monitor and secure sensitive data across on premises systems, cloud based locations, and endpoint devices. DLP can also help organizations comply with regulations such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).8 78% of NGOs report either not having any DLP tools in place, or are uncertain about their use. 32 1/2 THINGS TO CHECK IN AN EMAIL thd! ay Training Training is an essential tool for tackling cyber threats. Providing staff members with the knowledge and skills to recognise and take appropriate action against cyber incidents vastly improves the cybersecurity posture of any organization. of NGOs conduct regular cybersecurity awareness training. of NGOs think that their staff poses a significant risk in terms of cybersecurity. 52% 85% Do your employees receive regular cybersecurity awareness training? 52% 48% Yes No Security awareness and training programs can teach staff members about common cyber threats (e.g. phishing and ransomware), security best practices (e.g. password hygiene), how to report incidents and organisational policies. 33 CyberPeace Analytical Report Social Engineering Despite the high rate of concern cited by NGOs that social engineering and staff members pose significant risk, only 52% of NGOs report conducting regular cybersecurity awareness training. Furthermore, only 48% report carrying out phishing exercises for staff members. 78% of NGOs consider social engineering to be a main threat. 48% of NGOs conduct phishing exercies for all staff. Social engineering attacks can range from generalised schemes, aimed at wide audiences, to highly crafted campaigns trying to exploit the particular vulnerabilities of a specific target. Cybersecurity awareness sessions can play a key role in educating staff members about the various social engineering tactics employed by malicious actors. Specific exercises, focused on phishing attacks, can further improve an organization's readiness by simulating real life phishing scenarios that encourage vigilance and train staff to recognise suspicious communications. In Case Study #1, we provide an example of a ransomware attack against an NGO, which was initiated through a phishing email. As described in NIST Special Publication 800 123, “making users and administrators aware of their security responsibilities and teaching the correct practices helps them change their behaviour to conform to security best practices. Training also supports individual accountability, which is an important method for improving information system security”.9 34 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Part 5 Case Studies Case Study #1: Ransomware attack on an NGO 1. Overview An NGO based in Geneva that provides services to other local and international associations faced a ransomware attack in the winter of 2020, which resulted in over a week's worth of operational data being lost. This case study delves into the details of what happened during the attack, the organization's response, the impact on its operations, lessons learned, and recommendations for future cybersecurity preparedness. 2. What happened? In January 2020, a staff member was checking their emails and accidentally opened a PDF file containing malware, leading to the complete encryption of their data, by a threat actor. The perpetrators used a generic email with the PDF in attachment to launch the attack. The NGO does not believe it was specifically targeted by the attackers. The infection initially started on one workstation and subsequently spread to the organization’s server. The server stored crucial data, including booking information, financial and accounting data, and personal data of staff members. The attackers demanded a considerable sum of money, in bitcoin, for the decryption of the data. The attack involved a ransomware referred to as REvil (Ransomware Evil). This ransomware was first discovered in April 2019 and has been responsible for numerous high profile cyberattacks. REvil encrypts files on the victim's computer or network, making them inaccessible, and REVIL ransomware operators demand a ransom payment from their victims in exchange for the decryption key. Malware is a malicious software. These are pieces of code designed to damage, destroy, or subvert computer systems. Malware includes viruses that can replicate and stop systems from working. 35 CyberPeace Analytical Report Ransomware is a type of malware designed to extort money by encrypting/blocking access to files or the computer system until a ransom is paid. The NGO had never previously dealt with a cybersecurity incident like this. At a personal level, the employee who opened the link was both alarmed by what had happened and also angry about being deceived. As described by the Director of the NGO, “My colleagues got scared when confronted with this. The colleague who opened the email containing the malware started to feel guilty. We all did our best to reassure them. But there was this feeling of vulnerability, of being exposed.” All colleagues and management were supportive, promoting a strong “no blame” culture. What is a ransomware attack? A ransomware attack is a type of malicious cyberattack in which a perpetrator encrypts a victim's data or files, rendering them inaccessible, and then demands a ransom payment from the victim in exchange for a decryption key or a promise to restore access to the data. Ransomware typically gains access to a victim's computer or network through various means, such as malicious email attachments, infected software downloads, or exploited vulnerabilities in software or systems. Once the ransomware infiltrates the victim's system, it begins encrypting files, making them unreadable without a decryption key. This encryption process can affect a wide range of files, including documents, images, databases, and more. After encrypting the victim's files, the attacker displays a ransom note on the victim's screen or leaves a text file with instructions on how to pay the ransom. The note typically includes the ransom amount, the cryptocurrency (e.g. Bitcoin), wallet address for payment, and a deadline for payment Response The NGO contacted its IT provider for guidance as it did not have an internal person in charge of cybersecurity or IT. The NGO was advised to immediately disconnect the server from the network until a technician arrived in person. Hoping that its backup would restore 36 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 its systems and operations, the NGO chose not to engage with the cybercriminals or to pay the ransom demanded. However, while the backup was successful, it had not been updated with the last weeks’ worth of operational data, which was lost as a result. Recommendations to deal with a ransomware attack Technical recommendation Implement automated and regular data backups of critical systems and data. Regularly test backups to ensure their integrity and reliability. Ensure backups are stored in an offline or offsite location, disconnected from the network. include Deploy advanced endpoint security solutions that behavior based detection mechanisms to identify ransomware activity in real time. Use email filtering solutions to detect and block malicious email attachments and links. Strategic recommendations. Develop a robust backup and recovery strategy as part of the organization's business continuity plan. Develop and enforce a cybersecurity policy that includes employee training on identifying phishing emails and maintaining strong password hygiene. Ensure key stakeholders, including IT personnel, legal counsel, and management, are aware of their roles and responsibilities in the event of an attack. Establish communication channels and contact information for external entities such as law enforcement and cybersecurity experts. Ransom payments The NCSC recommends that organizations not pay ransom demands, as there is no guarantee the criminal party will uphold their terms and paying ransoms encourages future attacks. For any Swiss organisations faced with a demand for a ransom payment, the NCSC urgently recommends discussing this with the cantonal police.10 37 CyberPeace Analytical Report 4. Impact This ransomware attack had several notable impacts on the organization: i. Data recovery: Some data was lost. The organization managed to recover a part of its data, but it required a significant amount of time and effort. ii. Financial impact: The attack disrupted the organization's budget planning and led to unexpected expenses, such as purchasing additional security measures and conducting employee training. iii. Operations: The attack temporarily disrupted the organization's server and one employee's computer, in addition to losing one week's worth of operational information and data. iv. Cybersecurity awareness: The incident highlighted the organization's vulnerability to cyberattacks, prompting them to take cybersecurity more seriously. They made the decision to invest in cybersecurity insurance shortly after this attack. v. Harm: Distress on the employee and his colleagues Lessons Learned Some of the key lessons learned by this NGO after this incident include: i. Training and awareness: Regular cybersecurity training and awareness programs for employees are essential to protect against future attacks. ii. Data backup and recovery: Ensuring proper data backup and recovery procedures are in place are crucial to safeguard against data loss during an attack. iii. Cybersecurity insurance: Investing in cybersecurity insurance can help mitigate financial losses in the event of a cyberattack. 38 es CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Case Study #2: Attack on an NGO website 1. Overview This case study is about a small NGO based in Geneva whose mission is to provide professional and independent services to assist humanitarian and development organizations in their work. The organization’s website serves as a central platform for communication with partners and clients. In early 2020, this NGO experienced a cyberattack resulting in the compromise of their website, causing significant disruption to their operations. This case study explores the details of the attack, the organization's response, the impact on their operations, lessons learned, and recommendations. 2. What happened? In early 2020, the organization fell victim to a website attack. When trying to connect to the website, they discovered that they were automatically redirected to a Chinese language marketplace website. The exact timing of the attack remains uncertain, as it was discovered during a period of reduced monitoring. Unfortunately, the organization did not have a backup of their website, requiring a full reconstruction of the site which took nine months to complete. While the organization does not believe that they were deliberately targeted by the cyberattack, it appears the attackers were aiming to generate traffic to the marketplace website. The identity of the threat actor remains unknown, and there is no attribution or evidence linking any individual or group to the attack. What is a website attack? A website attack refers to a malicious activity or series of actions aimed at compromising the security, functionality, or availability of a website or web application. These attacks target vulnerabilities in websites to gain unauthorized access, steal data, deface web pages, disrupt services, or carry out other malicious activities. Website attacks are typically orchestrated by cybercriminals, hackers, or other threat actors. 39 CyberPeace Analytical Report There are different types of website attacks. Some of the most common ones include: SQL Injection (SQLi): In an SQL Injection attack, an attacker injects malicious SQL queries into input fields on a website. Cross Site Scripting (XSS): XSS attacks involve injecting malicious scripts into web pages viewed by other users. Cross Site Request Forgery (CSRF): In CSRF attacks, attackers trick users into unknowingly executing actions on a website without their consent. Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS): DDoS attacks flood a website's server with a massive volume of traffic, overwhelming its resources and causing it to cease functioning normally or to become unavailable to legitimate users. It is said to be distributed when the source of the attack is composed of a multitude of devices or systems. Website Defacement: The illicit or unauthorized modification of the appearance and content of a target’s website or the act of redirecting traffic to other web pages Response In the wake of the website attack, the organization's response was marked by an initial sense of panic, but swiftly transformed into a determined effort to address the situation. The organization embarked on reconstructing their website from the ground up, a process that demanded extensive time and resources. To mitigate the risk of future breaches and regain a sense of trust and security, the organization changed their web hosting provider. Throughout this incident response, the organization demonstrated transparency and accountability by promptly informing external stakeholders, and its board members, about the incident. The absence of backups meant that the organization lacked a vital component of an effective incident response strategy, underscoring the importance of preparedness in the face of unforeseen cybersecurity threats. Recommendations to deal with a website attack Technical recommendations Maintain frequent and up to date backups of the organization’s website data and configurations. Implement an automated backup 40 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 system that includes both the website files and the associated database. Keep all website software, plugins, and themes up to date. Regularly apply security patches and updates to mitigate vulnerabilities that attackers may exploit. Deploy a Web Application Firewall (WAF) to filter and block malicious traffic, including common attack patterns like SQL injection and cross site scripting (XSS). Implement Multi Factor Authentication (MFA) for all administrators and users with access to the website's Content Management System (CMS) or backend. Security Headers: Implement security headers, such as Content Security Policy (CSP) and HTTP Strict Transport Security (HSTS), to enhance the website's resilience against various types of attacks. Strategic recommendations Develop a comprehensive Incident Response Plan (IRP) that outlines the steps to take in case of a website attack. Assign roles and responsibilities, and conduct regular drills to ensure readiness. Train your staff and volunteers on cybersecurity best practices, such as recognizing phishing emails and maintaining strong passwords. Implement continuous website monitoring to detect suspicious activities or traffic anomalies promptly. Set up alerts for security incidents and respond swiftly to any anomalies. Enable Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) for your website to encrypt data in transit, protecting user information and enhancing trust. Establish a clear process for reporting security incidents both internally and, if necessary, to relevant authorities. Consider obtaining cybersecurity insurance to help cover potential financial losses in case of a security breach. Conduct regular security audits and risk assessments to identify and address emerging threats. 41 CyberPeace Analytical Report Impact The ramifications of the cyberattack on the organization were wide reaching and profound. Firstly, the attack had a detrimental impact on the organization's image and credibility, as their website remained unavailable for an entire month. During this period, the organization's stakeholders, including partners and clients, were left with a sense of uncertainty, eroding the trust they had previously enjoyed. Internally, the attack led to significant operational disruptions, with communication channels being severely affected, impacting the efficiency and effectiveness of the organization's day to day activities. Furthermore, the attack disabled a contact form which hindered interactions with possible collaborators, potentially and temporarily impeding future partnerships with other NGOs. Lastly, the process of reconstructing the website imposed considerable financial costs on the organization, including expenses for web development, hosting, and security measures. These multifaceted repercussions underscore the critical importance of robust cybersecurity measures and incident preparedness in safeguarding an organization's reputation, operations, and financial stability. 5. Lessons Learned Some of the key lessons learned by this NGO after this incident include: i. Maintaining up to date backups of their digital assets a fundamental precautionary measure often overlooked until a crisis unfolds. The experience also underscored the necessity to regularly monitor and implement website updates and patches, reinforcing the imperative of proactive security maintenance. ii. Ensure robust relationships with service providers, emphasizing the need to consistently verify the adequacy of their security measures. iii. Enhance staff awareness within the organization regarding the ever present cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities, reaffirming the importance of continuous education and vigilance safeguarding against potential breaches. in 42 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Case Study #3: A Man in the Middle cyberattack against an NGO 1. Overview The organization in this case study is a medium sized non governmental organization (NGO) based in Geneva. In September 2019, this organization fell victim to a Man in the Middle (MitM) cyberattack. A MitM is a type of cyberattack in which a malicious actor intercepts, with the potential of altering, the communication between two parties without their knowledge or consent. This case study explores the details of the attack, the NGO's response, the impact it had, lessons learned, and recommendations for other NGOs facing similar threats. 2. What happened? In September 2019, shortly after the summer holidays, the NGO's finance department started following up on pending invoices. They noticed that they had not received payment from an overseas Foundation they worked closely with. The finance team followed up with the Foundation, mentioning that the payment had not been made. The Foundation responded to the NGO confirming that they had paid, with proof of payment. The NGO noticed that on these emails, the domain of the emails contained the characters “nn” in the place of “m” and that a spoof domain was being used. This is when the NGO realized that they were the victims of a MitM cyberattack. Upon further investigation, the NGO realized that the Foundation had received a second email with the same invoice but with different banking details on the invoice. The attackers skillfully edited a PDF invoice and set up a spoof domain with an optically close name resembling the NGO’s real domain. This false domain was used to send a second email with the same email addresses in “to” and “cc” as the original email but all on the spoof domain This incident occurred during a period when many employees were on holiday, reducing the likelihood of immediate detection, and indeed the Foundation paid the invoice to the modified banking details. The NGO believes that the attackers intercepted an email either during its transmission from the NGO or upon reception at the Foundation. This 43 CyberPeace Analytical Report was probably done through compromised email boxes either at the NGO or the Foundation. At the same time, the NGO received two similar emails with spoof domains and modified bank details, however the NGO noticed the spoof and did not pay the invoices to the modified banking details. In all three cases, the modified banking details referenced the same branch of an international bank. What is a Man in the Middle / email intrusion cyberattack? In a MitM attack, the attacker secretly positions themselves between the sender and receiver of data, allowing them to eavesdrop on the communication, steal sensitive information, or manipulate the data being exchanged. As a result of a MitM attack, cybercriminals can: Create Email Forwarding Rules: Attackers may create forwarding rules within an email account, which automatically forward copies of incoming emails to an external email address controlled by the attacker. Access Sent Items: Cybercriminals can access a victim's sent items to gather information on the emails the victim has sent, including any sensitive data or attachments. Compromise Business Emails: Business Email Compromise (BEC) attacks involve compromising the email accounts of high level employees in an organization to impersonate them and authorize fraudulent transactions, such as wire transfers. Steal Data: Attackers may use email intrusion to steal sensitive data, such as personal information, financial data, intellectual property, or login credentials for other online services. Invade NGO’s Privacy: Intruders may invade the privacy of individuals or organizations by accessing and reading their email correspondence Response The NGO’s initial response to the MitM attack was characterized by confusion and concern. An in depth forensic investigation was initiated by the IT departments of the NGO and the Foundation, 44 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 which both revealed the same timeline. Within hours of the initial email with the attached invoice being sent, a dummy domain had been registered and the spoof email sent to the Foundation. The NGO began an internal investigation to determine the source and extent of the cyberattack. They identified that some unauthorized rules were set on the email accounts of some employees including that of the Finance Deputy Director. The NGO believes they were particularly targeted due to the size of the NGO and the industry it operates in. The NGO received assistance to tackle this attack from their external IT provider, in addition to the efforts of their IT/cybersecurity team. After contacting the Serious Fraud Office in the UK, the NGO could not identify the cybercriminals, however they were able to provide the bank details used in the successful attack and the two unsuccessful attempts. A few months later the bank reimbursed the funds to the Foundation. To prevent future similar attacks, the IT team in the NGO enacted policies that block any rules that forward information externally (outbound auto forwarding block), as well as other technical measures. Additionally the finance department implemented supplementary controls, including that invoices are only sent from the finance mailbox to the recipient, without copying any NGO staff members on the email. Additionally, the NGO finance department reaffirmed that the NGO will only make payments to the bank account provided by a vendor at the time of signing the initial contract. Changes in bank details must be provided to the NGO independently of invoicing. Recommendations to deal with a MitM attack Technical recommendation Implement strong encryption protocols (e.g. TLS/SSL) for data in transit, especially for web browsing, email, and sensitive communications. Implement a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) system to securely manage and distribute digital certificates for websites and services. Implement email security measures, such as SPF, DKIM, and DMARC, to prevent email spoofing and phishing attempts. Use end to end encrypted email solutions when handling sensitive information. 45 CyberPeace Analytical Report Employ intrusion detection systems (IDS) and intrusion prevention systems (IPS) to monitor network traffic for suspicious activity indicative of MitM attacks. Require MFA for accessing critical systems and sensitive data to prevent unauthorized access even if credentials are compromised. Keep all software, including operating systems, web browsers, and security software, up to date with the latest security patches Strategic recommendations Train employees and users to recognize the signs of MitM attacks and practice safe browsing and email habits. Encourage reporting of any kind of suspicious activity. Implement the principle of least privilege (PoLP) to restrict user access to only the resources necessary for their roles. Assess the security practices of third party vendors, especially those providing critical services or software that could be vulnerable to MitM attacks. Consider adopting a Zero Trust Network Access (ZTNA) approach, which assumes that no entity—whether inside or outside the network—is trusted by default. Evaluate the need for cybersecurity insurance to provide financial protection in case of a MitM attack or other security incidents. 4. Impact This MitM attack had several significant impacts on the organization: i. Financial Loss: Both the Foundation and the NGO incurred a financial loss due to the fraudulent payment. This was later recovered but the NGO was not expecting the recovery. ii. Operational Disruption: The attack disrupted the NGO’s internal operations and caused confusion at the Foundation and the NGO as neither initially understood what had happened. iii. Reputation Damage: The incident had a potentially negative impact on the NGO’s reputation, raising concerns amongst management and the board. iv.. Awareness: Staff members felt both concern and guilt, and there was a need for increased awareness of cybersecurity threats. 46 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 5. Lessons Learned The cyberattack taught the organization several valuable lessons: i. The importance of verifying and cross checking payment details, especially for invoices involving significant amounts. ii. The need for enhanced staff awareness and training to recognize and respond to phishing attacks. iii. The implementation of rules and processes for handling financial transactions securely. iv. The importance of taking swift action to secure email accounts and applying Multi factor Authentication (MFA) to enhance email security. 47 CyberPeace Analytical Report Appendices Appendix A: Detailed recommendations Organizational recommendations NGOs should have a specific cybersecurity policy tailored to their organization. A cybersecurity policy outlines how an organization safeguards itself against and responds to cyber threats. It serves as a vital framework that encompasses various aspects of cybersecurity, including systems access control, incident response, inventory procedures, password management and data protection. A cybersecurity policy should involve the senior leadership, as its main goal is to protect the organization’s strategic assets. Without the backing of senior management, cybersecurity policies and rules are less likely to be effective. An effective policy can help an organization to comply with regulatory requirements and reduce the risk of falling victim to cyberattacks. Consolidating the applicable aspects of an organization’s cybersecurity into a single, comprehensive policy can ensure consistency, accessibility for staff, and ease of management. Ensuring policies are constructed, utilised and properly documented may enhance an organization’s eligibility for cyber insurance coverage.The CyberPeace Institute has created a cybersecurity policy template, which is provided as a free resource for participants in the CyberPeace Builders program. NGOs can adapt this template to their specific organisational profile and needs. Policy topics include; responsibilities, data classification, authentication and access, travel, infrastructure, devices, systems and software policy. The NIST Cybersecurity Framework and ISO/IEC 270001 are frameworks that can help organizations develop and implement their cybersecurity policy.11 12 An inventory of physical assets is the foundational security of any organization's ICT infrastructure and relies on knowing what assets are owned and managed, what their status is, where they are located, and who is responsible for them. The process of keeping a list of devices is important for multiple reasons, including: 48 CyberPeace Institute 2023 providing the number and type of devices, including servers (web servers, database servers, email servers etc.), users’ computers/ phones/tablets, networking equipment (routers, switches, firewalls, etc.), Internet of Things (IoT) devices (security cameras, door locks etc.), printers, and other network connected devices. shows whether the devices are internal or external. provides awareness of the location, status and responsible party for each device, allowing for faster identification and mitigation of threats. The Canadian Centre for Cyber Security (CCCS) publication “Using Information Technology Asset Management (ITAM) to Enhance Cyber Security” provides guidance on the ITAM process including steps on how to identify, track and manage IT assets.13 The global distribution of an organization’s assets such as web servers, may not be restricted to the country an organization is physically located. Understanding where an organization’s internet facing assets are located is fundamental for the successful implementation of any organizational security setup. Knowing the location of assets can also provide insights into how organizations may be exposed to certain types of other risks, for instance those stemming from geopolitical and geographical factors. Ensuring an Incident Response Plan (IRP) is in place is essential for all NGOs. This is a written document, approved by the senior leadership team, that helps organizations before, during, and after a confirmed or suspected security incident. An IRP should clarify roles and responsibilities and provide guidance on key activities. Additionally, an IRP should also include a cybersecurity list of key people who may be needed during a crisis.14 NIST’s ‘Computer Security Incident Handling Guide’ is a valuable resource for any organization looking to establish or improve its IRP. The publication provides guidance on establishing incident response capabilities and handling incidents efficiently and effectively. The guidelines are adaptable and can be used regardless of specific operating systems, protocols or applications.NGOs should run security awareness and training programs for all staff members. By teaching users about security risks and how to prevent them, organizations can greatly reduce their risk of compromise. 49 CyberPeace Analytical Report NGOs can use the NIST Cybersecurity Framework to improve cyber preparedness and increase resilience against cyberattacks. The Framework provides a comprehensive approach to cybersecurity management and can be adapted to the requirements of organisations of any size. The Framework is organized by five key Functions: Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond, and Recover.16 → Follow guidance and advice provided by the National Cybersecurity Centre (NCSC). The NCSC website is a valuable resource for both individuals and organisations. It provides information and advice on topics including, cyberthreats and incidents, technology considerations, awareness raising and prevention. NGOs can also use the website to report cyber security incidents and find specific help to address them.17 Technical recommendations Basic Cybersecurity Measures: Implement strict account and software management regularly update software, remove unused software and disable unnecessary user accounts. Establish backup procedures to mitigate infrastructure failure from cyberattacks, outages or other unexpected events. Identify and use cybersecurity tools, such as Multi factor Authentication (MFA), Next Generation Anti Virus (NGAV) software, Firewalls, Password Managers, VPNs and Data Loss Prevention (DLP) systems. Protect websites by using a reverse proxy18 or cloud based security service. These solutions can protect websites against a range of threats including Distributed Denial of Service attacks (DDoS). DDoS protection services safeguard websites and networks by absorbing or deflecting excessive internet traffic, ensuring that an organisation's online presence remains uninterrupted and secure. Encourage users to check if their private and professional email accounts appear in known data breaches using resources like HaveIBeenPwned. Schedule regular security audits, performed by external third party experts. Establish Naming Conventions with consistent account naming 50 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 rules. Regularly review and verify security for external accounts. Restrict administrative privileges to a minimal amount of trusted users. Implement DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) on mail servers. → Apply to be a member of the CyberPeace Builders. As well as getting free access to the program’s network of cybersecurity experts, the program offers free web monitoring services to detect compromised accounts or infrastructure Enhanced Cybersecurity Measures: Conduct disaster recovery (DR) exercises to identify areas of improvement in case of infrastructure failure from cyberattacks, outages or other unexpected events. Organise a Security Information and Event Management (SIEM). A SIEM solution helps organizations detect, analyse and respond to security threats. The technology collects logs from an organization’s devices and systems and then analyses them for suspicious activity. As well as helping to stop cyberattacks before they happen, SIEM can also help organizations meet compliance requirements. Use a zero trust security model. Zero trust is a cybersecurity approach that focuses on users, assets and resources instead of static network based perimeters. It assumes no automatic trust based on physical location or asset ownership, requiring authentication and authorisation before granting access. Zero trust adapts to trends like remote working, bring your own device (BYOD) and cloud assets, emphasising individual resource protection.20 As a final step, Zero Trust Network Access (ZTNA) is likely the most effective approach for achieving both secure and anonymous connections, though it does require substantial configuration. Use Domain based Message Authentication, Reporting and Conformance (DMARC) to prevent spammers from using the domain to send emails without the domain owner’s permission. 51 CyberPeace Analytical Report Appendix B Methodological considerations This report is founded on data sourced and analyzed by the CyberPeace Institute from three primary channels: primary data through direct engagement with Geneva based NGOs, through surveys and interviews. The data has been aggregated and anonymized to respect the privacy and security of the participating NGOs. data from open sources, collected through open source intelligence techniques and the passive scanning of digital footprints/assets to identify any risks or vulnerabilities, and; data collected from a trusted network of partner cybersecurity companies providing additional insights stemming from secondary datasets such as telemetry data, data breaches/leaks or cybersecurity ratings. In order to identify the impact cyberattacks have on Geneva based NGOs, as well as these organizations’ readiness and cyber resilience levels, the methodology employs a mixed methods approach. A mixed methods design is a procedure for collecting, analyzing, and mixing both qualitative and quantitative methods and data in a single study to provide a more comprehensive, fact based solution to the analysis topic. This enables the analysts to learn from, adapt and apply the methodology to other geographical regions around the world, with the purpose of producing knowledge that respects the same analytical standards Project scope and participation of NGOs In March 2023, a total of 44 Geneva based NGOs were contacted to participate in the study. Out of the 44 NGOs, 27 agreed to take part in the different stages of the analysis, starting with a survey that was submitted by all participants within the timeframe of 3 to 4 weeks. The NGOs taking part in this project conduct their activities across a range of sectors, including humanitarian, health, justice, human rights, peace and education. These NGOs bring vital aid and services to tens of millions of beneficiaries across the globe. The NGOs operate internationally across various regions, particularly Europe, Africa, the 52 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Middle East and Asia. A number of the organizations also operate in North America, Oceana, Latin America and the Caribbean. Based on OECD classifications21 relating to employee count, 67% of NGOs participating in the project fall into the micro or small size enterprise brackets, and 33% of NGOs are classified as medium or large size enterprises: Micro enterprises, defined as those with fewer than 10 employees. Small enterprises, defined as those with 10 49 employees. Medium sized enterprises, defined as those with 50 to 249 employees Large enterprises, defined as those with over 250 employees. This report survey to NGOs encompassed multiple choice and open ended questions related to organizational size, sector, ability to detect cyber threats, strategies for protection against such threats, and methods for response and recovery following cyberattacks. An internal team of experts, from the CyberPeace Institute, consulted the NIST Cybersecurity Framework to ensure the surveys were designed according to industry standards, whilst being adapted to the operational needs and realities of NGOs. The survey also leveraged the experience of the Institute’s team members who work directly with NGOs through the CyberPeace Builders program. The surveys were conducted in English. Furthermore, from the 27 NGOs, 6 interviews were conducted with organisations that had direct experience of cyberattacks. These semi structured interviews gathered qualitative insights with regard to the human centered understanding of the consequences of cyberattacks. The interviews were conducted in both French and English. Additionally, 19 of the NGOs participating in the project accepted the analysis team carrying out a technical analysis of their organization’s internet facing assets to assess if there were identifiable cyber threats and vulnerabilities. The NGOs that participated in this project are being supported by CyberPeace Builders program to have the results of their technical analysis reviewed. The sample size of 27 NGOs allowed for a detailed examination of each participating NGO, providing an understanding of their unique contexts, challenges, and practices. This depth of analysis can yield nuanced insights that may be obscured in larger samples. However, the sample size, which constitutes approximately 6% of NGOs in Geneva, 53 CyberPeace Analytical Report might not capture the full range of cybersecurity preparedness and threat awareness across the city’s NGO community. Additionally, the findings may not be easily extrapolated from the current sample size to other NGOs in different geographical areas, even though general trends can be observed Limitations This report highlights the range of threats NGOs are facing in International Geneva, but does not aim to serve as a comprehensive guide for the issues discussed. Our analysis did not include questions in relation to the NGOs understanding of the legal and regulatory environment in Switzerland and/or the countries they operate in, which although of importance was not the focus. For example, data protection regulations are key considerations for NGOs managing data which must be respected, with reporting obligations in the event of data breaches. The report purposefully omits detailed information regarding the NGOs that took part in this project. The analysis involved organisations disclosing sensitive information about their vulnerabilities and threat profiles. As such, this precaution is taken to protect the privacy and safety of all the organisations. This report is not exhaustive and acknowledges that there are other threats, vulnerabilities and actors that come into play from those mentioned herein. There is little available analysis focused on the cyber threat and cybersecurity capacities specific to NGOs. A significant proportion of the analysis currently available is focused on threat actors and their tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs) with very limited information on victims, targets and the societal impact of attacks. This report advocates systematic and standardized collection, analysis and sharing of information to provide better responses and facilitate international collaboration. The CyberPeace Institute welcomes any feedback to develop this knowledge product. Any enquiries regarding the Project or interest in the analysis process are welcome, please visit the Institute’s website to get in contact. 54 CyberPeace Institute 2023 Appendix C Glossary Attack and Cyberattack: A disruptive cyber incident, data breach or a disinformation operation conducted by a threat actor using a computer network or system with malicious intent to cause damage (technical, financial, reputational or other) or extract / steal data without consent. Backup: Copy of computer data that is kept in a safe environment, to be used in case of infrastructure failure to restore a system to a working condition. Bitcoin: The first decentralized digital currency / cryptocurrency in which transactions can be performed without the need for a central bank. Bring Your Own Device (BYOD): A policy allowing or encouraging employees to use their own computer or smartphone for professional activity. CEO Fraud: Type of phishing attack where the threat actor usurps the identity of a CEO or another high ranking individual of a targeted organisation. Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs): CERTs are expert groups that handle cybersecurity incidents. Cloud based solutions: Refers to applications, storage, on demand services, computer networks, or other resources that are accessed with an internet connection through another provider’s shared cloud computing framework. Cross Site Scripting (XSS): XSS are a type of injection, in which malicious scripts are injected into otherwise benign and trusted websites. Also known as HTML injections. Cryptocurrency: Digital asset designed to be used as a trustworthy and non forgeable means of monetary exchange. Cyberpeace: Cyberpeace exists when human security, dignity and equity are ensured in digital ecosystems. Cybersecurity: The practice of protecting computer systems and networks from unauthorized information disclosure, theft of or damage to their hardware, software, or electronic data. Through the application of technologies, processes and controls, cybersecurity serves to reduce the risk of cyberattack and protect systems, networks and technologies. Cyberspace: Digital systems and the online world make up cyberspace, which covers everything accessible through computer networks and the internet. This includes everything from corporate networks and social media platforms, to bank accounts and cloud services. It also includes all connected appliances, such as video surveillance cameras, gaming consoles, TV sets or robot vacuum cleaners. 55 CyberPeace Analytical Report Darknet or Dark web: A darknet is an overlay network within the Internet that can only be accessed with specific software, configurations, or authorization (e.g. TOR, Freenet, I2P or ZeroNet) intended to defend digital rights by providing security, anonymity, and censorship resistance. Though it is used for legitimate reasons, it has been heavily used by criminals and the term Darknet nowadays is generally associated with websites (also called onion sites) that are specifically used for criminal purposes. Data breach: The exposure of confidential, sensitive or protected information to an unauthorised person. This could be accidental, such as a USB drive left on a train or an email attachment sent to the wrong person, but it can also be deliberate, as when malicious actors access a network and exfiltrate (target, copy and transfer) data. Decryption: Converting encrypted (see definition ‘Encryption’) data into its original form. It is a process to reverse encryption and put data back into a human readable form. Decryption Key: Piece of information needed for the decryption process. Disinformation: False or misleading information spread often covertly with the intention to deceive. Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS): DDoS is an attack technique to flood a network, service or server with excessive traffic to cause it to cease functioning normally. It is said to be distributed when the source of the attack is composed of a multitude of devices or systems Domain: On a computer network, a domain is the name given to a computer resource or set of computer resources administered by one given entity. DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM): is used to verify the integrity of an email message by generating cryptographic keys and signing outgoing email messages with a digital signature. Encryption: Reversible process of converting information or data into an encoded format using mathematical computation algorithms. It is commonly used to protect sensitive information at rest or in transit so that only authorized parties can view it. Firewall: A part of a computer system or network that is designed to block unauthorized access while permitting outward communication. Hacktivists: Persons or groups that gain unauthorized access to computer files, systems or networks to further social, political or ideological ends. Incident response: The activities that address the short term, direct effects of an incident and may also support short term recovery. Incident response plan (IRP): An incident response plan is a document that outlines an organization’s procedures, steps, and responsibilities of its incident response program. 56 CyberPeace Institute | 2023 Internet of Things(IoT): Describes smart devices that are connected to the internet but are not personal computers or smartphones. IP address: In the information technology context, Internet Protocol address. Malware: Malicious software. These are pieces of code designed to damage, destroy or subvert computer systems. It includes viruses that can replicate and stop systems working; ransomware, which blocks systems until a ransom is paid; and spyware, which is hidden on the target system and spies on the device users. Man in the middle attack(MitM): Is a cyberattack where the attacker secretly relays and possibly alters the communications between two parties who believe that they are directly communicating. Multi factor authentication (MFA): Authentication using two or more factors to achieve authentication. Factors include: (i) something you know (e.g., password/ personal identification number [PIN]); (ii) something you have (e.g., cryptographic identification device, token); or (iii) something you are (e.g., biometric). Patch: A piece of software whose purpose is to fix a software bug or vulnerability. Phishing: A fraudulent communication, purporting to be from a reputable source, with the aim to trick the recipient into giving away sensitive data or installing malware. Port: Virtual point where network connections start and end. Ports are software based and managed by a computer's operating system. Each port is associated with a specific process or service. Ports allow computers to easily differentiate between different kinds of traffic: emails go to a different port than webpages, for instance, even though both reach a computer over the same Internet connection. Ransomware: A type of malware designed to extort money by encrypting / blocking access to files or the computer system until a ransom is paid. Sender Policy Framework (SPF): Is used to check sender domain authenticity by checking which IP addresses are legitimate for mail sent from an organization’s domain. Server: A computer or device on a network that manages network resources. Social Engineering: Psychological manipulation of a person to make him/her perform an action or give away some information. Software: Is a set of instructions, data or programs used to operate computers and execute specific tasks. It is the opposite of hardware, which describes the physical aspects of a computer. Spoofing: Faking the sending address of a transmission to gain illegal [unauthorized] entry into a secure system. 57 CyberPeace Analytical Report Spyware: Software designed to spy on the activity of a computer user Secure Sockets Layer (SSL): Is an encryption based Internet security protocol. The principle of least privilege (PoLP): Is an information security concept which maintains that a user or entity should only have access to the specific data, resources and applications needed to complete a required task. Threat actors: Also known as cyber threat actors or malicious actors, are individuals or groups that intentionally cause harm to digital devices or systems. Traffic Light Protocol (TLP): The protocol requires that the person sending information assigns it a colour using a colour code. This colour indicates if and in what ways this information may be further disseminated. Someone who receives info, and believes that certain info can be disseminated on a greater scale, must first ask for permission from the sender. Virtual private network (VPN): Encrypts your connection and anonymizes your IP address. It creates a secure tunnel that can access internal resources. Virus: Software designed to replicate itself and propagate in a computer infrastructure. Vulnerability: A vulnerability is an error in a piece of software that may be exploited to compromise a computer system. Web application firewall (WAF): Helps protect web applications by filtering and monitoring HTTP traffic between a web application and the Internet. It typically protects web applications from attacks such as cross site forgery, cross site scripting (XSS), file inclusion, and SQL injection, among others. Web server: Computer system capable of delivering web content to end users over the internet via a web browser. Zero trust: Cybersecurity approach that focuses on users, assets and resources instead of static network based perimeters. It assumes no automatic trust based on physical location or asset ownership, requiring authentication and authorisation before granting access. 58 CyberPeace Institute 2023 This document is intended to provide guidance for building block working groups and developers of products that will be integrated into a GovStack implementation. It also provides guidlines for implementers and system integrators who are deploying solutions that leverage the GovStack approach. It provides guidelines and principles that should be considered by all building blocks and cross cutting requirements that must be considered for any GovStack project This will accelerate the collaborative development of best of breed digital public goods, enhancing efficiency and transparency across the world especially in low resource settings GovStack aims to provide a reference architecture for digital governance software to support sustainable development goals. Rooted in a "Whole of Government" approach, the GovStack Framework provides a methodology for leveraging common technology components and infrastructure to more easily create and deploy interoperable digital platforms which can address high priority use cases across multiple sectors. The guidelines and requirements described in this document provide a framework for the development of digital building blocks oriented toward this goal The following provide criteria and definitions for Building Blocks, developed by organizations whose work is focused around achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) The SDG Digital Investment Framework, developed by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the Digital Impact Alliance (DIAL), has formally defined criteria. Building blocks MUST meet the following criteria Additionally, the Digital Public Goods Alliance has created a definition of Building Blocks. In this definition, a building block Refers to software code, platforms, and applications that are interoperable, provide a basic digital service at scale, and can be reused for multiple use cases and contexts Can be used to facilitate the delivery of digital public services via functions, which may include registration, scheduling, ID authentication, payment, data administration, and messaging Building blocks can be combined and adapted to be included as part of a stack of technologies to form a country’s Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) "Building blocks can be as simple as a common set of rules or protocols (for example email programs like Simple Mail Transfer Protocol SMTP), or complex (for example an open source health information system like the DPG, District Health Information Software DHIS2)“ Autonomous: building blocks provide a standalone, reusable service or set of services, they may be composed of many modules/microservices Per the DPGA definition, to be considered a building block, solutions must meet the following technical requirements determined by the GovStack Initiative which includes Building blocks are software modules that can be deployed and combined in a standardized manner. Each building block is capable of working independently, but they can be combined to do much more Building blocks are composable, interoperable software modules that can be used across a variety of use cases. They are standards based, open source and designed for scale Each Building Block represents, as much as possible, the minimum required functionality (MVP) to do its job. This ensures each Building Block is usable and useful on its own, and easily extensible to support a variety of use cases A Building Block is composed of domain driven microservices, modeled as closely as possible on existing roles and processes. This helps ensure each building block is as useful as possible in the real world Building Blocks exchange data using lightweight, human readable data that can easily be extended where needed. Data models and APIs are described in a lightweight manner that’s human readable, allowing them to be easily and quickly understood and validated An admin only form builder which facilitates building user interfaces (e.g., select questions to be displayed in a maternal and child health registration process) User interfaces (i.e., forms) which can be used in lieu of individual end user apps building their own forms (e.g. I’m building a new maternal and child health application; I’d like to use a registration screen flow that’s been pre built in the registration building block as part of a larger, composed application.) A public API which exposes the critical back end services performed by this BB (adding a mom to a database; checking for a mom’s enrollment status in a program) to be used (as a microservice) by existing or new applications with legacy/bespoke needs (e.g., i’ve already got a maternal and child health app that the CHWs are using, and I want to send a webhook to the registration BB after a CHW clicks “submit” on our custom form.) A building block is only so useful on its own. In practice, building blocks MUST be connected together in a secure, robust, trusted manner that facilitates distributed deployments and communications with existing services It is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED that a building block use an information mediator (as described below and in the Information Mediator Building Block specification) for any communications across the internet. An Information Mediator is not required for communication between building blocks which are co located. In this case, communication may occur using standard API calls Each building block deployment SHOULD use an Information Mediator to federate and communicate with other data consumers and providers, particularly when communicating between services that are not co located. This ensures the confidentiality, integrity, and interoperability between data exchange parties. An Information Mediator MUST provide the following capabilities In order to effectively deploy a software solution using the Information Mediator, several policies and processes will need to be applied. This section briefly describes that organizational processes that must be in place First, a central operator will be identified and created. This organization will be responsible for the overall operation of the system, including operations and onboarding new members. Policies and contractual agreements for onboarding need to be created Trust services need to be set up internally or procured from third parties, including timestamp and certificate authorities. This provides the necessary infrastructure to support distributed deployments Finally, members can be onboarded and provided with access to the Information Mediator and methods to register the services that they provide as well as discover services that are available Once agreements are in place, members can deploy new services in a decentralized, distributed manner. Before deploying a new service, the central operator must be notified of any changes to access rights, including organization and machine level authentication before it can publish or consume data This section provides an overview of the technical processes and architecture that must be implemented once the organizational model has been created A Central Operator is responsible for maintaining a registry of members, the security policies for building blocks and other member instances, a list of trusted certification authorities and a list of trusted time stamping authorities. The member registry and security policies MUST be exposed to the Information Mediator Certificate authorities are responsible for issuing and revoking certificates used for securing and ensuring the integrity of federated information systems. Certificate authorities MUST support the Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) so that an Information Mediator can check certificate validity Time stamping authorities securely facilitate time stamping of messages. Time stamping authorities MUST support batched time stamping The Service Registry provides a mechanism for building blocks to register the services that they provide and for other building blocks to discover and consume those services. Any services provided or consumed by a Building Block that leverages the Information Mediator architecture MUST use this service registry functionality Within this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 RFC2119 RFC8174 when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here Registration: Any approval/license/certificate issued by a public entity as a result of a request/declaration made by a user of the public service. The result of a “registration” is usually a number and/or a document (called certificate, license, permit, authorization, registration, clearance, approval, etc.) Authentication: This is the technical process of establishing that the credentials (i.e. username, password, biometric etc.) provided by a party (user, system, other) is valid and that the party can be granted basic access to system resources with default access rights. Note that authorization also needs to be applied for a party to access protected resources Authorization: This is the technical process of establishing whether or not an authenticated party has rights to access a given protected resource. Access rights can typically be granted or revoked administratively on a read only and/or read write and/or execute basis through an administrative provisioning process. Permissions or rights defined for a party typically manifest in an access token that is granted at the time of authentication for the party. Hence the processes of authentication and authorization are intrinsically related Workflow Terminology: See more comprehensive descriptions of the workflow terminology in the Workflow and Business Process Automation Building Block specification As with any software implementation, there are constraints and limitations in the GovStack approach that must be addressed. In any country context, there will be deficiencies that present challenges to any technology implementation. In the context of GovStack, the constraints and deficiencies that may be present must be considered at the outset of any project Indicator Description ICT Governance Poor or non existent National ICT governance structure that makes decisions and ensures accountability framework to encourage desirable behavior in the use of ICT in the country. However, this may be described in documents but the implementation is suboptimal or not enforced. Government ICT policy or Framework No strategic policy framework for the acquisition and use of IT for social and economic growth in the country. The policy might be at the development stage and where the policy exists, the policy implementation is lagging or non existent. ICT infrastructure The development of IT infrastructure in the country is lagging behind or sub optimal because of poor policies and insufficient investments in the ICT sector. Low coverage of power or the national grid and little penetration of alternative sources of energy especially in the rural. Financial Resources and Investments in ICT Limited funding for ICT projects and initiatives. ICT intervention may not be prioritized. No institutionalized or routinized support for ICT projects/ interventions by the government. ICT projects/ Initiatives ICT projects and intervention are implemented in a silo, none standard approaches and most of the ICT interventions are proprietary and high cost ventures from private institutions. No national standard architecture for interoperability/ integration of systems Capacity development and social instruments Low ICT literacy level among user, None or little research and development done by the national institutions/ academia on the use and scale up ICT in the country. Very few ICT professionals to support large scale ICT projects at national level Connectivity/ Internet access Lack of or minimum network coverage by GSM and or broadband technologies. Low cellular subscribers per capita and very low internet subscribers per capita. The percentage fibre connectivity in the country is low. A greater percentage of the population do not have computers, laptops or smart phones. Access to information Number of household with internet connectivity is concentrated in the urban areas as opposed to rural areas. Cost competitiveness Technologies, which are not always ready for market, are often more expensive than incumbent technologies, without the necessary supportive infrastructure. Competition from existing technologies, including unsustainable technologies Knowledge and skills New technologies require specialized knowledge and skills, which are often lacking in host countries where education levels in science, engineering and technology can be low, and emerging areas. ICT specialists is low Social Legitimacy New technologies treated with suspicion in local communities especially if prior experience of job losses or unintended social consequences Cultural barriers New technologies are seen as a challenge to cultural traditions and communal activities. Technology can also face barriers such as language, role of women in the society, lack of entrepreneurs or dependencies created by decades of development aid Additionally, the Principles for Digital Development are especially relevant when designing for low resource setting. While the following principles are relevant to many technology deployments, when leveraging the GovStack approach it is important to keep these principles in mind during all phases of design, development, and deployment Design of systems should be rooted in the needs of the citizens/users of these platforms. A Citizen centric technology will include the following attributes The best tools evolve from empathizing, understanding and designing for the needs of end users. Accordingly, we’ve identified a series of use cases and user journeys here: GovStack Use Cases Each use case is composed of a collection of modules, or building blocks. As you can see, a relatively small set of these building blocks can be readily applied to a wide variety of applications in low resource settings Where possible, GovStack advocates for the use of open technology, which can reduce cost and help avoid vendor lock in. Open technology can be defined as Any Building Blocks should be developed in a manner which is sustainable and ensures that the technology will continue to be updated and maintained. Some core considerations for sustainability are From Wikipedia: a variant of the service oriented architecture (SOA) structural style arranges an application as a collection of loosely coupled services. In a microservices architecture, services are fine grained and the protocols are lightweight With any technology deployment, security is paramount. Detailed security requirements are defined in the GovStack Security Requirements. Beyond those standards, Building Blocks should have the following attributes It is vitally important that technology solutions be usable by all. Some characteristics of accessible design include Meets users where they are: web, mobile, SMS and/or voice. UI supports accessibility technologies, e.g. screen readers GovStack is rooted in the concept that Building Blocks should be re usable and configurable, such that they can support multiple use cases with minimal effort Building blocks are responsible for meeting all cross cutting requirements or specifying why specific requirements do not apply. Govstack compliance and certification processes will validate these requirements APIs MUST not include Personally Identifiable Information (PII) or session keys in URLs use POST or other methods for this Resource identification in requests Individual resources are identified in requests, for example using URIs in RESTful Web services. The resources themselves are conceptually separate from the representations that are returned to the client. For example, the server could send data from its database as HTML, XML or as JSON—none of which are the server's internal representation Resource manipulation through representations. When a client holds a representation of a resource, including any metadata attached, it has enough information to modify or delete the resource's state Self descriptive messages Each message includes enough information to describe how to process the message. For example, which parser to invoke can be specified by a media type There will be no other form of interprocess communication allowed: no direct linking, no direct reads of another team’s data store, no shared memory model, no back doors whatsoever. The only communication allowed is via service interface calls over the network All service interfaces, without exception, must be designed from the ground up to be externalizable. That is to say, the team must plan and design to be able to expose the interface to developers in the outside world. No exceptions Building blocks MUST NOT use shared databases, file systems or memory for data exchange with other building blocks Use semantic versioning when documenting changes to API definitions. Any breaking changes to APIs MUST use a different endpoint, as shown here: e.g. /api/v1 and /api/v2 Documentation on the installation and use of the Building Block MUST be provided. Where possible, this documentation SHOULD be stored alongside code in a repository. Documentation MAY be generated from code where applicable Each building block’s service APIs MUST be defined and exposed using a standardized machine readable language. External APIs are described using the OpenAPI 3.x specification. See the following resources for additional information Each building block MUST be ready to be deployed as independent container images. Source code and build instructions SHOULD be committed to a public code repository where possible A building block may be composed with Kubernetes or docker compose. All build files must be included alongside the source code When a building block requires deployment tools such as Kubernetes or Ansible, configuration and deployment scripts should be included in the building block repository. Use of this type of deployment configuration will make individual components of the building block independently scalable and make building blocks less monolithic and more efficient Building Blocks MUST conform to GDPR principles, including the right to be forgotten account deletion, and privacy requirements to protect the rights of individuals. Note that these requirements may vary by region, and building blocks must conform to regulatory requirements wherever they are deployed Building Blocks MUST have a mechanism for generating logging information. This may be as simple as using STDOUT and capturing through docker logs, or may use other log sinking technologies When Building Blocks require callback functionality, they must use webhooks and not direct links to functions within the building block GET and PUT APIs (as well as HEAD, OPTIONS, and TRACE) must be idempotent, returning the same value if called multiple times. POST and DELETE APIs will not be idempotent as they change the underlying data. Reference https://restfulapi.net/idempotent rest apis/ for more information API calls SHOULD be able to be made independently of one another. Each API call should contains all of the data necessary to complete itself successfully Transactions that cross multiple services SHOULD provide a correlation ID that is passed with every request and response. This allows for easier tracing and tracking of a specific transaction Some blocks may require the use of security keys. Those that do must have clearly defined key rotation policies to enhance security Each building block MUST be capable of running independently, without requiring other dependencies such as external data stores or other building blocks Designs should support occasional connectivity/low bandwidth, and should allow for asynchronous communication between building blocks. A Publish/Subscribe design pattern can be used to handle changes, allowing loosely coupled solutions to be assembled without changing existing APIs JSON SHOULD be used for data models/services wherever possible. Where JSON exhange is not possible, building blocks must use other standard data formats (such as XML) If an existing standard is available, it should be used, e.g. DICOM/Hl7/FHIR for healthcare. TMForum has a large library of standardized APIs and data models that can be used Building blocks and building block solutions MUST leverage existing standards, especially those listed in the Standards section below Building blocks SHOULD validate all incoming data to ensure that it conforms with the expected format and type. APIs should also sanitize incoming data, removing any unsafe characters or tokens A building block MAY provide a mock testing implementation of API functionality to show example endpoints and data payloads. Where a building block has a human user interaction, it SHOULD be able to present information to the user in their local language. Building blocks should be designed to support multiple locales Where precise timestamps are required, building blocks SHOULD leverage Network Time Protocol (NTP) to synchronize timestamps between servers Software development best practices are recommended for all building blocks. The following guidelines should be followed as part of the software development process No languages, frameworks, or dependencies should be used in a building block where that component has an EOL of less than 5 years The Consent Building Block enables services for individuals to approve the use of their Personal Data by defining the principles, functions, and architecture of an information system. For organisations that process Personal Data​,​ it provides the ability to know the ​individual's will and legitimately process such Personal Data. The Consent Building Block is a process oriented GovStack Building Block facilitating auditable bilateral agreements within a multi agent environment that integrates with most other Building Blocks This specification has used several available and recognised open standards below and legal frameworks (such as the GDPR) for laying the groundwork for its approach to consent In the GovStack context, consent is understood as a voluntary declaration by an individual to approve the processing of their Personal Data. It is one specific justification for Personal Data processing that is assumed to be required by legal or ethical conditions. It assumes that the person can decide on processing their Personal Data, managed in and by other GovStack Building Blocks, and also that the person is free to withdraw their consent at any time allowing a healthcare provider to fetch socio demographic data from a government run population registry to provide adequate primary healthcare services allowing a government official to fetch relevant data from other/multiple government run registries to analyse the eligibility for a social benefit programme When a person is simply informed of the processing of the data by the organisation as part of the service provided under contract or by an authority When consent does not have to be obtained in a situation where the entity does not identify or cannot identify people with reasonable effort Data Disclosure Agreements between organisations are already in place. For example, a healthcare organisation has already got the required authorisation to use the citizen data registry To link a Consent Agreement with the specific Individual, Consent Building Block assumes the authentication and authorization to be handled in a trusted manner outside of it (see below) Within the early scope of the Consent Building Block, the act of delegating is kept outside the scope of the Consent Building Block. It is assumed that the authorisation to act on behalf of someone else is already resolved It is the organization's (a Data Provider or a Data Consumer) obligation to manage and implement internal policies toward its employees relating to their responsibilities for Personal Data processing integrity, specifying it in the employment contract or by other means The life cycle of a consent agreement starts and ends within the organisation responsible for the information system. The organisation knows the context in which the information system operates and the intended purpose of the service. The rules and regulations to be applied for a given level of assurance define the functional framework for consent management Consent Building Block deals with transparency on data usage in a given context. Thus privacy by design of the system's actors is often an excellent guiding principle for interpreting international, national, and organisational policies and governance principles to implement the functional consent framework. A tangible outcome from a Data Protection Impact Analysis (DPIA) is a structured approach that can deliver the input for the actual implementation of the Consent Building Block Individual consent is captured within the context of digital interaction. This interaction is composite of all the information systems involved, not solely the Consent Building Block. Thus, the legal and ethical boundaries of consent are defined in the entirety of the interaction. In particular, consent, as defined by ISO/TS 17975:2015(E), should be seen as a "set of agreements and constraints" that an informed and knowledgeable [individual] agrees to apply to their data processing. This definition, not based on the purpose of the data usage, can lead to a consent management framework also incorporating authorisations or unrelated constraints of the system. For example, in health information and healthcare service delivery, consent is also the process whereby a set of constraints is agreed upon so that information may be collected and used or disclosed. However, it is also the outcome of the process. As a rule of thumb, limiting unintended secondary usage of data is helpful to separate "consent" for a purpose from "consent" as an agreement to constraints and authorisation imposed by the system's functional requirements As a result, the organisation responsible for the information system is the driver of the definition of the functional consent management framework. It is also the function of the organisation to design the workflow for obtaining and processing the consent in a way that is purposeful, but not annoying for individuals or data processors with unnecessary bureaucratic overhead. From this framework, the Consent Building Block achieves its purpose by employing Consent Agreements that contain the following A data policy that could be reused across multiple consent agreements (for example, based on the General Data Protection Regulation or any specific regulation) Definition: In this phase, the organisation (a Data Provider or a Data Consumer) adopts and defines a Data Policy that applies to the industry or sector specific data usage as a template. While this phase is considered a “black box” to the Consent Building Block, it is an essential reference point for configuration and compatibility checks in all following phases Preparation: In this phase, the organisation (Data Provider or Data Consumer) that intends to process Personal Data configures the Consent Agreement and relevant rules for its use. An organisation could use Personal Data for third party data sharing, as an example Capture: In this phase, the Individual can review the Consent Agreement and, once agreed upon, it is captured in a Consent Record by the organisation and stored for verification. This allows an auditor to check and ensure records are in place to process the individual's Personal Data. In the future, this phase could also encompass delegation and other individual use cases Proof: In this phase, an organisation (A Data Provider or a Data Consumer) can demonstrate that a valid record exists for performing data processing within itself or with other organisations. This allows for internal usage and for an auditor to verify and ensure records are in place to process the individual's Personal Data Consent Building Block enables interaction between three (3) distinct user categories, which in combination create the necessary trust framework for the integrity of Personal Data processing. The actors are defined via distinct human roles to be performed in various consent life cycle phases Below is the graphical depiction of the actors and their interactions; a more detailed description of the Consent Building Block capabilities is provided in Chapter 4 Key Digital Functionalities It is important to realize that while the actors are defined via human roles, the consent related interactions between such roles can be executed in machine to machine workflows performing tasks in the interest of the respective actor Building Block Relationship description Identity Building Block It is assumed the Consent Building Block has already obtained requisite access tokens. Workflow Building Block Manages the workflow and rules associated with requiring or not requiring consent to use Personal Data. Scheduler Building Block Provides an engine for time based triggers to various events of an automated business process, which might also require consent. Information Mediator Building Block The information mediator Building Block provides a gateway for exchanging data related to consenting workflows; it also provides logs for auditing purposes Term Description Configuration technical implementation of all the content and process conditions as defined by the Data Policy for Consent Agreement creation, reading, updating and deletion, as well as for providing all necessary actors with the required operations Consent Agreement is the agreement to be signed by the Individual and the Data Controller as prescribed by Data Policy, based on which the Data Providing System may transmit the data to the Data Consuming System for the purposes described in the Consent Agreement. Consent Record is created when an individual signs a consent agreement. It represents a signed consent agreement. Consent Reference a unique identifier used to locate and verify the validity of the Consent Agreement. Data Providers is a legal entity that stores and provides access to an Individual's data, which requires the Individual's consent for processing (outside of its primary purpose/location). Data Consumers is a legal entity that requires the Individual's data from the Data Providers according to the consent of the Individual. Data Disclosure Agreements a Data Disclosure Agreement (DDA) exists between two organisations where one organisation acts as a Data Provider and the other as a Data Consumer. The DDA captures how data is shared between the two organisations and what role and obligation each party has. Data Policy is a formal description of the purpose, nature and extent of consent based Personal Data processing, covering the configuration needs by Data Providing System and Data Consuming System and the conditions defined by law. Data Processing Auditor is an entity (a person or an organisation) verifying the legitimacy of Personal Data processing by Data Controllers and Data Processors based on the Data Policies and performed tasks. The entity is not to be confused with a data policy auditor that is independent of the actors involved in the operations of consent management and can engage directly with the Consent BB service operator. Delegate the person giving consent (signing Consent Agreement); on behalf of the Individual, Individual is a person about whom the Personal Data is stored in an information system (a.k.a. “Data Subject”) and who agrees or not with the use of this data outside of its primary purpose/location. Legal Entity is an organisation (public or private) ​that has the rights and obligations to define standards for Personal Data processing. E.g. a public health authority Personal Data is any information that (a) can be used to identify the Individual to whom such information relates, or (b) is or might be directly or indirectly linked to the Individual (ISO(IEC 29100:2011) Regulations are broadly defined as rules followed by any system: could be laws, bylaws, ​norms or architectures that​ regulate a given system. The term and definition is inspired by Lessig’s modalities of regulation: https://lessig.org/images/resources/1999 Code.pdf Key Digital Functionalities describe the core (required) functions that this Building Block must be able to perform The Consent Building Block enables organisations to enforce Data Policies that require signed consent by Individuals for the use of their Personal Data. Its key purpose is to allow individuals to view Consent Agreements and sign or withdraw their consent on what Personal Data is used and accessible to organisations. It also clarifies the Data Policy applied, such as the purpose, retention period, jurisdiction, third party data sharing, etc The Consent Building Block implements the key functionalities described in the consent management lifecycle. It includes the ability to configure consent agreements by an organisation admin, present consent requests towards individuals, capture consents, enable queries if consent exists, or not, and enable independent audit of consents The functionalities are derived from the consent agreement lifecycle and categorised according to the Actors described above. While the consenting workflows (as described above) are implicitly considered the centrepiece of the Consent Building Block, it is important to realise that the integrity of consent management can only be achieved if robust configuration before and auditing after the Consent Agreement signing and Consent Record verification activities are in place. Hence, the functionalities are described following the logical sequence of the consent agreement lifecycle and they are all equally important components of the Consent Building Block The Consent process (creating and signing Consent Agreements and Consent Records) is initially managed in the application provided by the Organisation that is legally required to collect the consent. Since it can be either a Data Consuming organisation or a Data Providing organisation, the Consent Building Block allows both to be able to verify their conformance with the underlying Data Policy, both organisations must be able to access and use the application While the Actors generally fall in line with the categories of the functionalities, it is important to realise that “auditing” functions in the narrow sense, verifying if data processing is being (or has been) processed according to the Data Policy requiring a consent, is relevant to various entities involved in the data processing. For this reason, the generic “verification” activity may be executed as part of various workflows satisfying the needs of different actors Following is the first core set of key functionalities of the Consent Building Block. For potential future developments of the specification follow the work in progress at GovStack confluence page The Administrator (Data Provider or Data Consumer Admin) configures the Consent Building Block on behalf of the organisation. For simplicity, it is foreseen that one organisation involved in the data processing transaction (that is either Data Provider or Data Consumer) takes the responsibility for the configuration of the Data Policy and respective Consent Agreements(s), and so that the organisation’s Administrator maintains the required configurations logging and maintaining an auditable overview of all Personal Data transactions according to Consent Agreements as well as configuration versions The table below summarises the key use cases identified for an organisation's Administrator. Organisations can be Data Consumers or Data Providers, i.e. the organisations legally delegated the responsibility for collecting consent for the systems handling Personal Data processing Consent use cases Link(s) to the UCS CREATE CONSENT AGREEMENT Here, an organisation Administrator creates a Consent Agreement based on the Data Policy requirements. UC C PIC A 001 UPDATE CONSENT AGREEMENT Here, an organisation Administrator updates the Consent Agreement based on the Data Policy requirements. UC C PIC A 002 READ CONSENT AGREEMENT Here, an organisation Administrator reads the Consent Agreement. UC C PIC A 003 DELETE CONSENT AGREEMENT a special case of consent agreement update. UC C PIC A 004 CONSENT AGREEMENT CHANGE NOTIFICATION Notifications for Data Providing and Data Consuming Systems, as well as Individuals upon changes to Agreement or Policy configuration. UC C PIC A 005 agreeing and disagreeing with and toggling between the conditions of Personal Data use as described in the Consent Agreement The scope for the current version of Consent Building Block assumes that the Individual is acting for themselves. Ultimately the Consent Building Block will include in the Consenting Process the capacity to sign a Consent Agreement in the name of another individual to act as the Delegate, which is used as the criterion for technical implementation. However, the Delegate and the Individual relationship is expected to be maintained outside of the Consent Manager, which assumes that the person signing the Consent Agreement (i.e. Consenter) has been authorised to do so Consent use cases Link to the UCS VIEW CONSENT Here, the Individual views the Consent Agreement and the conditions for Personal Data processing (with adequate clarity for informed understanding). This includes obtaining copies of the consent agreement. UC C PIC I 001 GIVE CONSENT Here, the Individual signs a Consent Agreement during a data sharing workflow. Note that this can also happen offline without data sharing in place. UC C PIC I 002 WITHDRAW CONSENT Or update existing consent UC C PIC I 003 Consent agreement change notification UC C PIC I 004 Important note: In the Consent Building Block, we define the Data Processing Auditor's role (see 1.3 Terminology and 1.5.3 Actor definition) as an organisation's auditor implementing the Consent Building Block. The auditor role will most probably be akin to a Data Protection Officer (DPO), possibly from an external third party organisation and involve activities outside of the Consent Building Block To avoid ambiguity, we use the precise term Data Processing Auditor to stress the specificity of tasks to be performed by and for the Consent Building Block; all other actions not within the Consent Building Block's scope are considered as an external prerequisite and as a “black box” activity. With respect to audit, this role is distinguished from the data policy auditor. The Data Processing Auditor relies on an audit universe defined by the control and risk management of the specific project and context (i.e. outside the Consent Building Block). “Who needs to consent to what” is the outcome of a DPIA (Data Protection Impact Analysis), ensuring that the data policies are compliant with the relevant data protection regulations for the project The main actions a Data Processing Auditor (or Data Protection Officer, DPO) is expected to perform via Consent Building Block are For the implementation of a specific use case, it is important to distinguish the Data Processing Auditor, an actor described here, from a data policy auditor, an actor of the risk organisation. It is expected that the two roles are coordinated in the risk management process. Within the Consent Building Block, the Data Processing Auditor performs the tasks that will allow a data policy auditor to confirm that the implemented system complies with existing regulations demanding consent.The table below summarises the key use cases identified for the Data Processing Auditor Also to consider: “READ CONSENT STATUS” use case is also used by any workflow (and Actor) that requires verification of the consent status (for example, before executing the data transfer from Data Providing System to the Data Consuming System) Consent use cases Link to the UCS AUDIT CONSENT Query the Consents related to individuals or policies (opt in/opt opt) UC C PIC AT 001 MONITOR POLICY UPDATE Tracking Data Policy changes and configuration conformance with it; UC C PIC AT 002 READ CONSENT STATUS Viewing (reading, exporting) the Consent Agreements and relevant reports in a verifiable form UC C PIC AT 003 VERIFY CONSENT INTEGRITY Ability to check the integrity of the signed agreements UC C PIC AT 004 As described above under Universal Consenting Workflows, there may be an unlimited number of business processes that require consent. The following scenarios are but a few examples illuminating how appropriate access to data can and should be handled when processing or consuming data with the support of Consent Building Block functionalities Scenario Source Building Block Target Building Blocks Description 1.1 Querying: Which Consent Agreement is needed for specified data processing/ consumption? Any Workflow Building Block Consent Building Block does have knowledge or state to resolve which Data Consumer or Data Producer requires consent. Everything regarding consent has a precondition that a decision is made and manifested in the Workflow Building Block or any other Data Consumer. 1.2 Data processing/ consuming system stores/fetches data with consent + prompts the user if none exists Any Consent Building Block Given an Agreement ID and a User ID, the Consent Building Block can resolve if consent exists and possibly prompt the user. Workflow Building Block is especially inappropriate here because of User Interface integration and a blocking and sequential call stack. 1.3 Data processing/ consuming system stores/ fetches data with consent, no halts operations without consent Any Workflow Given an Agreement ID and a User ID, the Workflow Building Block can complete an atomic action requiring consent. Operations shall not proceed if consent does not exist. 1.4 Data processing/ consuming system stores/ fetches data with consent, consent is prompted asynchronously Any Workflow The Workflow Building Block may halt operations and asynchronously prompt the user for consent if none exists (or is invalid). After fetching consent, the Workflow Building Block should revert to the targeted data consuming/ processing operation. 1.5 Appropriate access to data that does not require consent Any Workflow Not necessarily related to Consent Building Block. 1.2 1.4 Side effects Workflow Any attempt to read consent and process/consume data is logged and auditable. 2.1 Inappropriate access: Data processing/consuming system inappropriately stores/fetches data without consent Any N/a Any consent requiring data access is assumed logged. Auditing of inappropriate data access is only possible when a log trace exists. 3.1 Workflow Consent Given an Individual, query if active Consent Records exist (for instance, to spot if other external data needs to be kept). 4.1 Any Consent Fundamental individual rights (General Data Protection Regulation/ Data Protection Act/ Right to be Forgotten/etc.) 4.2 Any Consent Fundamental individual rights (General Data Protection Regulation/Data Protection Act/etc.)